10.1 Form factors 347with a pure phase space distribution. Very recently,the LHCb collaboration reported a new analysis of thisprocess [2864]. Now, a signal in theJ/ψΛ subsystem,with preferred quantum numbersJP = 1 /2−, was es-tablished at high significance, named P0cs(4338). Dueto the presence of the second (anti)baryon, the phasespace in theB-meson decay is too small to access theheavier pentaquark state found in theΞb decay.
These structures have stimulated an intense discus-sion of the nature of these structures. Do they originatefrom threshold singularities due to rescattering in thefinal state leading to a logarithmic branching point inthe amplitude? Are they hadronic molecules like thedeuteron? Are they compact or triple-quark–diquarksystems or states where ac¯c center is surrounded bylight quarks?The peaks are mostly seen very close to importantthresholds. Thus they could originate from thresholdsingularities.Werefertoafewpublications[ 2635,2865–2867]. The LHCb collaboration studied this hypothesisand found it incompatible with the data, but the at-tempts continued [2868–2871].
Very popular are interpretations as bound statescomposedofcharmedbaryonsandanti-charmedmesonsor of charmonium states binding light-quark baryons.
The pentaquark states are then seen to be of molecu-lar nature and be bound by coupled-channel dynamics[2858, 2872–2882]. Diquark-triquark models were stud-ied [2883–2886], and sum rules are exploited in Refs.
[2887, 2888].
9.4.9 Concluding remarks:The study of hadrons with heavy quarks has developedinto a fascinating new field of particle physics. Particu-lar excitement is due to the discovery of unconventionalstructures that are hotly debated. But also the “regu-lar” heavy hadrons yield very useful information on theinteractions of quarks in the confinement region.
10 Structure of the NucleonConveners:V olker Burkert and F ranz GrossAfter discussion of the baryon spectrum in the previ-ous section, this section focuses on the nucleon, themost studied of all hadrons. Soon after the proton andneutron were established as the constituents of atomicnuclei, experiments measuring their magnetic momentsµN found that these spin-1/2 particles are not point-like elementary fermions with expected µp = 1 .0µNfor the proton, and µn = 0 for the neutron. Insteadµp ≈2.5µN and µn ≈−1.5µN, showing that the nucle-ons have significant structure. The discovery that theproton and the neutron are not point-like objects gavebirth to the field of hadron structure explorations dis-cussed in this section. Beginning with the Nobel prizewinning measurement of the finite size of the protonin elastic electron-proton scattering experiments (Hof-stadter, 1956) there have been generations of electronscattening measurements studying the proton and neu-tron form factors, reviewed by Andrew PuckettIn1968experimentsemployinghigh-energyelectronsscattering from proton targets at SLAC found surpris-ingly large inelastic cross sections, or structure func-tions, which rather than falling rapidly with the ex-changed four-momentum squared Q2 (as would elas-tic cross sections) were observed to “scale” withQ2.
The observation of scaling suggested scattering frompoint-like quarks in the proton, which could most nat-urally be described in terms of parton distribution func-tions(PDFs).ThesePDFmeasurementshaveshedlighton the momentum distributions of the different quarkspecies (Wally Melnitchouk), and with the use of spin-polarized electrons and polarized nucleon targets thequark contributions to the nucleon spin have been pre-ciselymeasured(XiangdongJi),puttingsignificantchal-lenges on the theory of QCD to reproduce or predict theresults of these measurements.
As these studies continue, both in experiment withhigh precision measurements, and in theory, new chal-lenges have arisen with the discovery of the general-ized parton distributions that lead to the assembly of3-dimensional tomographic images of the quark (andgluon) transverse spatial and longitudinal momentumdistributions employing deeply virtual exclusive pro-cesses (Andreas Schafer and Feng Yuan). The chal-lenges here will be on the experiments to access thesegeneralized parton distributions (GPDs) and transversemomentumdistributions(TMDs)fromexperimentslikedeeply virtual Compton scattering and deeply virtualmeson production, and on phenomenology aiding theanalysis. Some of the measurements are underway atJefferson Lab in several experiment halls. The EIC willvastly extend the kinematic reach of the measurementsinto the gluon dominated regime.
10.1 Form factorsAndrew Puckett348 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEON10.1.1 IntroductionElastic scattering of nucleons by point-like, leptonicprobes is among the simplest observable processes sen-sitive to the nucleon’s internal structure. The study ofelastic electron-nucleon scattering started in the 1950’swiththepioneeringmeasurementsbyRobertHofstadterandcollaboratorsintheHighEnergyPhysicsLab(HEPL)at Stanford [563] at incident electron energies of up to550 MeV. Among the highlights of this work were thefirst conclusive demonstration of a deviation of the elas-tic electron-proton scattering cross section from point-like behavior, and the first direct measurement of theproton’s finite size, leading to the awarding of the 1961Nobel Prize in Physics to Hofstadter for”for his pio-neering studies of electron scattering in atomic nucleiand for his thereby achieved discoveries concerning thestructure of the nucleons” .
In the Standard Model, the lepton-nucleon inter-action is purely electroweak. Due to the nucleon’s fi-nite size and complicated structure, the elastic scatter-ing cross section falls much more rapidly as a functionof the squared four-momentum transfer Q2 than thepoint-like scattering cross section. Given the limitationsof past, present, and planned lepton-hadron scatteringfacilities, elastic scattering of leptons by nucleons onlyoccurs with sufficient probability to be practically mea-surable at energy scales where electomagnetic interac-tions are dominant; i.e., at four-momentum transfersQ2 ≪M2W,Z, whereMW(MZ) ≈80(91) GeV is theW(Z) boson mass. As such, for most practical purposesthis process can be interpreted in the framework of low-order perturbation theory in quantum electrodynamics(QED). However, the elastic form factors of the nucleonfor charged- and neutral-current weak interactions areinteresting in their own right and accessible even at rel-atively low energies in neutrino scattering [2889] andthrough parity-violating asymmetries in polarized elec-tron scattering that are sensitive at leading order tothe interference between photon andZ exchange am-plitudes [2890–2892].
The use of elastic lepton-nucleon scattering as a pre-cision probe of nucleon structure and dynamics remainsa highly active area of investigation at low and highenergies. The dramatic improvements in energy reachand precision of these measurements over decades haveled to many important discoveries and surprises thathave dramatically reshaped our understanding of thenucleon. This section will present a brief summary ofthe status of the nucleon’s elastic scattering form fac-tors, their definition and physical interpretation, out-standing challenges and problems, and the near-futureoutlook for further advancements.
AAACHnicbVDLSgMxFM34dnxVXboJFkFdlJniayVFNy4VrC10Ssmkd9rQTGZM7ghl7Je48VfcuFBEcKV/Y1q78HUgcDjnXG7uCVMpDHrehzMxOTU9Mzs37y4sLi2vFFbXrkySaQ5VnshE10NmQAoFVRQooZ5qYHEooRb2Tod+7Qa0EYm6xH4KzZh1lIgEZ2ilVmE/CKEjVA7XimnN+rsDl9JAQoS3sN3bCbTodPHYDUC1v2VahaJX8kagf4k/JkUyxnmr8Ba0E57FoJBLZkzD91Js5kyj4BIGbpAZSBnvsQ40LFUsBtPMR+cN6JZV2jRKtH0K6Uj9PpGz2Jh+HNpkzLBrfntD8T+vkWF01MyFSjMExb8WRZmkmNBhV7QtNHCUfUsY18L+lfIu04yjbdS1Jfi/T/5Lrsol/6C0d1EuVk7GdcyRDbJJtolPDkmFnJFzUiWc3JEH8kSenXvn0XlxXr+iE854Zp38gPP+CQxUonI=| e ( k ) iAAACIHicbVC7SgNBFJ2N7/UVtbQZDJJoEXZF1MJCtLFUMCpkQ5id3E2GzM6uM3eFsOZTbPwVGwtFtNOvcRJTxMeBgcM553LnnjCVwqDnfTiFicmp6ZnZOXd+YXFpubiyemmSTHOo8UQm+jpkBqRQUEOBEq5TDSwOJVyF3ZOBf3UL2ohEXWAvhUbM2kpEgjO0UrO4H4TQFiqHG8W0Zr3tvktpICHCQyhXuuWtQIt2B+/cAFRrLNUslryqNwT9S/wRKZERzprF96CV8CwGhVwyY+q+l2IjZxoFl9B3g8xAyniXtaFuqWIxmEY+PLBPN63SolGi7VNIh+r4RM5iY3pxaJMxw4757Q3E/7x6htFBIxcqzRAU/14UZZJiQgdt0ZbQwFH2LGFcC/tXyjtMM462U9eW4P8++S+53Kn6e9Xd853S0fGojlmyTjZIhfhknxyRU3JGaoSTe/JInsmL8+A8Oa/O23e04Ixm1sgPOJ9f44Si0g==h e0( k0) |AAACGHicbVDLSgNBEJz17fqKevQyGAT1EHdF1KPoxWMEkwjZGHonnTg4M7vOzAphyWd48Ve8eFDEa27+jZPHIT4KGoqqbrq74lRwY4Pgy5uanpmdm19Y9JeWV1bXCusbVZNkmmGFJSLRNzEYFFxhxXIr8CbVCDIWWIvvLwZ+7RG14Ym6tt0UGxI6irc5A+ukZuEgirHDVY4PCrSG7n7PpzTqgJRwu7/7sOdHqFoTbrNQDErBEPQvCcekSMYoNwv9qJWwTKKyTIAx9TBIbSMHbTkT2POjzGAK7B46WHdUgUTTyIeP9eiOU1q0nWhXytKhOjmRgzSmK2PXKcHemd/eQPzPq2e2fdrIuUozi4qNFrUzQW1CBynRFtfIrOg6Akxzdytld6CBWZel70IIf7/8l1QPS+Fx6ejqsHh2Po5jgWyRbbJLQnJCzsglKZMKYeSJvJA38u49e6/eh/c5ap3yxjOb5Ae8/jeejp+D ⇤( q )AAACHnicbVDLSgMxFM34dnxVXboJFkFdlBnxtRLRjSupYKvQKSWT3mlDM5kxuSOUsV/ixl9x40IRwZX+jWntQqsHAodzzuXmnjCVwqDnfTpj4xOTU9Mzs+7c/MLiUmF5pWqSTHOo8EQm+jpkBqRQUEGBEq5TDSwOJVyFndO+f3UL2ohEXWI3hXrMWkpEgjO0UqOwF4TQEiqHG8W0Zt3tnktpICHCu/PN8lagRauNR24Aqvkj0ygUvZI3AP1L/CEpkiHKjcJ70Ex4FoNCLpkxNd9LsZ4zjYJL6LlBZiBlvMNaULNUsRhMPR+c16MbVmnSKNH2KaQD9edEzmJjunFokzHDthn1+uJ/Xi3D6LCeC5VmCIp/L4oySTGh/a5oU2jgKLuWMK6F/SvlbaYZR9uoa0vwR0/+S6o7JX+/tHuxUzw+GdYxQ9bIOtkkPjkgx+SMlEmFcHJPHskzeXEenCfn1Xn7jo45w5lV8gvOxxe7n6JA| N ( P ) iAAACIHicbVC7SgNBFJ317fqKWtoMBvFRhF0RtbAQbawkgolCNoTZyd1kyOzsOnNXCGs+xcZfsbFQRDv9GiePwteBgcM553LnnjCVwqDnfThj4xOTU9Mzs+7c/MLiUmF5pWqSTHOo8EQm+jpkBqRQUEGBEq5TDSwOJVyFndO+f3UL2ohEXWI3hXrMWkpEgjO0UqNwEITQEiqHG8W0Zt2dnktpICHCo/PNrfLmdqBFq413bgCq+S3VKBS9kjcA/Uv8ESmSEcqNwnvQTHgWg0IumTE130uxnjONgkvouUFmIGW8w1pQs1SxGEw9HxzYoxtWadIo0fYppAP1+0TOYmO6cWiTMcO2+e31xf+8WobRYT0XKs0QFB8uijJJMaH9tmhTaOAou5YwroX9K+VtphlH26lrS/B/n/yXVHdL/n5p72K3eHwyqmOGrJF1skV8ckCOyRkpkwrh5J48kmfy4jw4T86r8zaMjjmjmVXyA87nF5KVoqA=h N0( P0) |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F 1  µ+ F 2i  µ ⌫q ⌫2 MFig. 10.1.1Feynman diagram for elasticeN scattering in theone-photon-exchange approximation. Initial and final nucleonsare represented by three lines each to indicate the nucleon’sthree-quark valence structure, while the circle represents themodification of the photon-nucleon vertex function by the nu-cleon’s internal structure. See text for details.
10.1.2 Theoretical F ormalismThestartingpointfortheinterpretationofelasticelectron-nucleon(eN)scatteringistheone-photon-exchange(OPE)approximation, which is roughly analogous to the firstBorn approximation and/or the plane wave impulse ap-proximation in non-relativistic quantum scattering the-ory. In the following discussion the terms OPE andBorn approximation will be used interchangeably. Thetree-level Feynman diagram foreN →eN is depictedschematically in Fig. 10.1.1. An incident electron offour-momentum k ≡ (Ee,k) scatters from a nucleonof mass M, assumed to be initially at rest in the labframe, with initial four-momentum P ≡ (EN,p) =(M,0). The electron recoils with four-momentumk′ ≡(E′e,k′) and the nucleon recoils with four-momentumP′ ≡(E′N,p′) afterabsorbingthefour-momentumtrans-fer q ≡k−k′. Energy and momentum conservation inthis two-body scattering process dictateP′ = P + q =(M + Ee −E′e,k −k′). Together with the requirementthat the final-state particles be ”on mass shell”; i.e.,that they satisfy the relativistic energy-momentum re-lation for a free particle (E2 = p2 +m2), the kinematicsoftheelastic eN scatteringprocessareentirelyspecifiedby just two independent variables, commonly chosen tobetheincidentelectronenergy Ee andtheelectronscat-tering angle θe that are directly observed experimen-tally. Another main variable of interest is the squaredfour-momentumtransfer Q2 ≡−q2 = −(k−k′)2 >0.Inthe nucleon rest frame (or in the center-of-momentumframe, or any other frame in which the initial momentaof the colliding particles are collinear), the scatteringprocess is independent of the azimuthal scattering an-gle of the electron.10.1 Form factors 349In most modern electron-nucleon scattering experi-ments, it is safe to use the ultrarelativistic approxima-tion for the electron (|k|= Ee,|k′|= E′e,k2 = k′2 = 0),as the incident beam energies required for sensitivity tothe non-trivial details of nucleon structure are generallyquite large compared to the electron mass. Moreover,the vast majority of elastic electron-nucleon scatteringdata come from fixed-target experiments, in which thetarget nucleus is at rest in the lab frame. Unless other-wise noted, all of the following expressions apply in theinitial nucleon’s rest frame.
To develop intuition for the physical interpretationof elastic eN scattering, it is useful to consider theclosely related process of ultrarelativistic electron scat-tering from a static charge distributionρ(r) with totalcharge Ze, given in the OPE approximation by:( dσdΩe)= Zα24E2ecos2 (θe2)sin4 (θe2)|F(q)|2 (10.1.1)≡( dσdΩe)Mott|F(q)|2, (10.1.2)where Ee is the incident electron energy,θe is the elec-tron scattering angle,α is the fine structure constant,and F(q) is the electron scatteringform factor givenby the Fourier transform of the charge distribution:F(q) ≡∫ρ(r)eiq·rd3r, (10.1.3)with q ≡k −k′ the three-momentum transfer in thescattering process. The Mott cross section as defined inEq. (10.1.2) describes the scattering of ultrarelativis-tic electrons from a point-like target of chargeZe withzero spin and zero magnetic moment, in the limit wheretarget recoil is negligible. In the electron-nucleon scat-tering case, this corresponds to the requirementQ2 ≪2MEe. When target recoil is not negligible, the electronloses energy in the collision, and the Mott cross sectionis modified by the factorE′e/Ee:( dσdΩe)Mott= Zα24E2ecos2 (θe2)sin4 (θe2)E′eEe(10.1.4)In much of the modern literature, Eq. (10.1.4) is takenas the definition of the Mott cross section, whereas inMott’s original paper, the target recoil factorE′e/Ee isnotincluded.Hereafter,wewillusethedefinition( 10.1.4)unless otherwise noted.
Themostgeneralformofthesingle-photon-exchangeamplitude Mfor elasticeN scattering consistent withLorentz invariance, gauge invariance, and parity conser-vation as required by QED, and under the assumptionthatthenucleonisaspin- 1/2 fermionobeyingtheDiracequation, can be expressed using the Feynman rules ofQED (see, e.g., [2100]) as follows (in ”natural units”ℏ = c= 1):M= 4πα¯u(k′)γµu(k)(gµνq2)¯u(P′)Γνu(P) (10.1.5)HereMistheLorentz-invariantsingle-photon-exchangeamplitude, α is the fine-structure constant, ¯u and urepresent free-particle Dirac spinors for the incomingand outgoing particles, evaluated at the relevant four-momenta, γµ is a Diracγ matrix, gµν is the Minkowskimetric tensor, and Γν represents the photon-nucleonvertex function, given by:Γµ = F1(q2)γµ + iσµνqν2M F2(q2), (10.1.6)with σµν ≡i2 [γµ,γν] the antisymmetric tensor formedfromγµ,γν. The form factorsF1(q2) (Dirac) andF2(q2)(Pauli) can be thought of as matrix elements of theelectromagnetic current operator between final and ini-tial nucleon states. They are real-valued functions ofq2, which is the only independent Lorentz scalar vari-able on which the photon-nucleon vertex functionΓµcan depend. The convention (10.1.6) for theγ∗N vertexfunction is the most commonly used one in the litera-ture, and is constructed such that the amplitude is real(assuming real-valued form factors)101. F1 and F2 rep-resent the (electron) helicity-conserving and (electron)helicity-flipamplitudes,respectively.Thenucleon’schargeand Dirac (”non-anomalous”) magnetic moment distri-butions determine the behavior ofF1(q2), whileF2(q2)measures the contribution of the ”anomalous” magneticmoment distribution to the scattering.
Experimentally, the following linearly independentcombinations ofF1 and F2, known as the Sachs electric(GE) and magnetic (GM) form factors [2893], are moreconvenient:GE = F1 −τF2 (10.1.7)GM = F1 + F2 (10.1.8)The differential cross section in OPE is given in termsof the Sachs form factors by [563, 2893–2895]dσdΩe=( dσdΩe)MottϵG2E + τG2Mϵ(1 + τ) , (10.1.9)where τ and ϵ are kinematic parameters defined asτ ≡ Q24M2 (10.1.10)ϵ≡[1 + 2(1 + τ) tan2(θe2)]−1. (10.1.11)101 Since no other diagrams interfere with the OPE at the sameorder inα, we are of course free to choose the phase of the OPEamplitude arbitrarily without affecting physical observables.350 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEON02 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 2 (GeV/c)2Q5−104−103−102−101−101)2 M G τ + 2 E/(G 2 EG Global fit (Ye 2018)EGpµ = MAssuming GFig. 10.1.2Q2 dependence of the ratioG2E/(G2E+ τG2M) forthe proton, representing the maximum fraction of the reducedcross section carried by the electric term (atϵ= 1 ). The centralvalue and uncertainty band of the curve are calculated from theglobal fit of Ref. [1080]. The dashed line shows the ratio thatwould be obtained under the assumption of form factor scaling(GpM = µpGpE).
In the OPE approximation,ϵcan be interpreted as thelongitudinal polarization of the virtual photon [2895].
The electric and magnetic contributions to the scatter-ing can be separated by measuring the cross sectionwhile varying the beam energy and the scattering an-gle in such a way as to holdQ2 constant while vary-ing ϵ, a technique known as Longitudinal/Transverse(L/T) separation or Rosenbluth separation. The ”re-duced” cross sectionσR ≡ϵ(1 + τ)(dσ/dΩe)Measured(dσ/dΩe)Mott,is linear inϵ, with slope (intercept) equal toG2E (τG2M).
In the limit of very smallQ2, corresponding to long-wavelength virtual photons, the cross section behavesas if the nucleon were a point particle of charge ze(z= +1(0) forproton(neutron))andmagneticmomentµ= (z+ κ) (in units of the nuclear magneton), withκtheanomalousmagneticmoment.Inthislimit,theformfactors thus become GE(0) = z and GM(0) = z+ κ.
For small but finiteQ2 such that τ ≪ϵG2E/G2M, theelectric term dominates the cross section, and if targetrecoil is neglected, Eq. (10.1.9) takes the same form asEq. (10.1.2), withGE ≡F(q). Thus, in the low-energylimit, the electric form factor can be identified with theFourier transform of the charge density. Similar rea-soning leads to an interpretation ofGM as a Fouriertransform of the nucleon’s magnetization density.
The Rosenbluth formula (10.1.9) describesunpolar-ized electron-nucleon scattering. At large values ofQ2,the magnetic term dominates the OPE cross section,and the sensitivity of the Rosenbluth method toGEzxyP\*φ\*θkk' pp' Fig. 10.1.3 Standard coordinate system for nucleon polariza-tion components in elasticeN scattering. The arrow labeled⃗Pindicates the nucleon polarization direction and illustrates thedefinitions of the anglesθ∗ and φ∗ between ⃗P and the momen-tum transferq. Thexor ”t” (transverse) axis is parallel to thereaction plane but perpendicular to the momentum transfer.
The y or ”n” (normal) axis is perpendicular to the reactionplane defined byˆn≡ ˆq× ˆk. Thez or ”ℓ” (longitudinal) axis isalong the momentum transfer direction, which coincides withthe outgoing nucleon direction in the lab frame. The directionof the x axis is chosen so that the Cartesian basis(ˆx,ˆy,ˆz) isright-handed.
vanishes (see Fig.10.1.2). As the use of electron scat-tering to investigate nuclear structure expanded duringthe 1960s and 1970s, and as the technology to producespin-polarized electron beams and nuclear targets wasbeing developed and improved, several authors inde-pendently developed the theory of spin-polarized elas-tic eN scattering in the OPE approximation and exam-ined the implications for future measurements of polar-ization observables [2896–2899]. Nonzero asymmetriesarise when the incident electron beam is longitudinallypolarizedandeitherthe targetnucleonis alsopolarized,or the recoil nucleon polarization is measured, or both.
Asymmetries involving transverse electron beam polar-ization are generally suppressed by factors ofme/Eerelative to longitudinal asymmetries, and while suchasymmetries have been measured and are interestingin their own right, they are not ideal observables formeasuring electromagnetic form factors, and they willnot be considered further in this section.
Figure 10.1.3 illustrates the ”standard” coordinatesystemusedinmostoftheliteratureonpolarizedelasticeN scattering. In the case where the target nucleon ispolarized, the asymmetry in the scattering cross sectionbetween positive and negative electron beam helicities10.1 Form factors 351is given byAeN ≡σ+ −σ−σ+ + σ−(10.1.12)= Pbeam Ptarg [Atsin θ∗ cos φ∗ + Aℓcos θ∗] ,(10.1.13)where Pbeam is the longitudinal electron beam polariza-tion, Ptarg is the magnitude of the target nucleon polar-ization, and the anglesθ∗,φ∗ are defined in Fig.10.1.3.
The asymmetriesAt and Aℓ are given in terms ofτ, ϵ,and the form factor ratior≡GE/GM by:At = −√2ϵ(1 −ϵ)τr1 + ϵτr2Aℓ = −√1 −ϵ21 + ϵτr2 (10.1.14)Equations (10.1.14) show that the sensitivity of thedouble-spin asymmetryAeN to the form factor ratio isgenerally highest when the target is polarized perpen-dicular to the momentum transfer but parallel to thescatteringplane;i.e.,alongthe xdirectioninFig. 10.1.3.
Note also that the asymmetries are sensitive to theratioGE/GM, but notGE or GM separately. When the tar-get is unpolarized, the longitudinally polarized electrontransferspolarizationtotheoutgoingnucleon.Thenon-vanishing components of the transferred polarization inOPE arePt = Pbeam AtPℓ = −Pbeam Aℓ (10.1.15)Here Pt and Pℓ are the in-plane transverse and longi-tudinal components of the recoil nucleon’s polarization,respectively.Thesignchangeof Pℓ relativeto Aℓ reflectsthe spin flip required to conserve angular momentumwhen the nucleon absorbs a transversely polarized vir-tual photon. The ratioPt/Pℓ is directly proportional tothe form factor ratioGE/GM:GEGM= −PtPℓ√τ(1 + ϵ)2ϵ = −PtPℓEe + E′e2M tan(θe2)(10.1.16)Measurementsofthedifferentialcrosssections,Eq.( 10.1.9),andpolarizationobservables,Eqs.( 10.1.14)and( 10.1.16),in elasticeN scattering are the main source of knowl-edgeofthenucleon’selectromagneticformfactors,whichare among the most important precision benchmarksfor testing theoretical models of the nucleon. Moreover,precise knowledge of these form factors is required forthe interpretation of many different experiments in nu-clear and particle physics. In the next section, we sum-marize the existing data on nucleon form factors.
10.1.3 Experimental dataFigures 10.1.4, 10.1.5, 10.1.6, and10.1.7 summarize thestate of empirical knowledge of the proton electromag-netic form factors, as of this writing. The proton formfactors GpE and GpM extracted from cross section mea-surements, as well as the neutron magnetic form factorsGnM, can be described to within≈10% over most of themeasured Q2 range byGpE ≈GpM/µp ≈GnM/µn ≈GD,where GD is the ”dipole” form factor defined asGD =(1 + Q2Λ2)−2, (10.1.17)with the scale parameterΛ2 = 0 .71 (GeV/c)2 definingthe so-called ”standard dipole”. The neutron electricform factor GnE has a very different Q2 dependence;since the neutron has zeronet charge, GnE(0) = 0 . Nev-ertheless,the neutronrms chargeradius has been deter-mined with good precision via neutron-electron scatter-ing length measurements (see Ref. [278] and referencestherein). Existing measurements ofGnE in quasi-elasticelectron scattering on bound neutrons in light nucleartargets, shown in Fig.10.1.6, exhibit a rapid rise withQ2 to an appreciable fraction ofGD (nearly ≈50% atthe highest Q2 for which we have reliableGnE data).
Precise high-Q2 measurements of GpE/GpM using thepolarization transfer method revealed that GpE startsfalling much faster thanGD above 1 (GeV/c)2, whileGpM/µp falls to about 70% ofGD at the highest mea-sured Q2 values. Reliable neutron form factor data onlyreach Q2 ≈3.4(4.5) (GeV/c)2 for GnE(GnM), but signif-icant expansions in theQ2 reach of the neutron dataare anticipated in the near future.
Thethree-dimensionalFouriertransformof GD givesan exponentially decreasing charge density as a func-tion of the radial distance from the center of the nu-cleon, assuming a spherically symmetric density. Themean square radius of the nucleon charge density is re-lated to the slope of the electric form factor in the limitQ2 →0:⟨r2E⟩= −6 dGEdQ2⏐⏐⏐⏐Q2=0(10.1.18)For the standard dipole form factor, the implied chargeradius is√⟨r2E⟩D = 0 .81 fm, which is in rough agree-mentwithmodern,precisedeterminationsoftheprotoncharge radius from electron scattering and the spec-troscopy of electronic and muonic hydrogen. See Ref.
[2905] for a very recent, in-depth review of the experi-mental and theoretical status of the proton charge ra-dius.352 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEON4−103 −102 −101 −101 10 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.6−0.4−0.2−0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2D/G pEG Direct L/T separationsPolarization observables Xiong 2019 (1.1 GeV)Xiong 2019 (2.2 GeV) Simon 1980 (GEp only)Bernauer 2014 Global fit (Ye 2018)Fig. 10.1.4 (approximate) World data forGpE/GD. ”DirectL/T separations” are published point extractions ofGpE fromRosenbluth plots. The points labeled ”Bernauer 2014” are thedirect Rosenbluth extractions from the Mainz A1 dataset [581,2900]. The data labeled Xiong 2019 are from the PRad experi-ment [2901]. The global fit is from [1080]. See text for details.
2−101 −101 10 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2) D G p µ /( pMG Direct L/T separationsKirk 1973 (updated RC)Sill 1993 (updated RC)Christy 2022Bernauer 2014Global fit (Ye 2018)Fig. 10.1.5(approximate) World data forGpM/(µpGD). The”Direct L/T separations” are published point extractions ofGpM from Rosenbluth plots. The Kirk 1973 data [2902] andthe Sill 1993 data [2903] are point GpM extractions from sin-gle cross section measurements, with updated radiative correc-tions as detailed in Ref. [2904]. The data labeled ”Christy 2022”are the point GpM extractions from the individual cross sec-tion measurements published in Ref. [2904]. The points labeled”Bernauer 2014” are the direct Rosenbluth extractions from theMainz A1 dataset [581,2900]. The global fit curve is that of Ref.
[1080]. See text for details.
Proton data and discussionFigures10.1.4and10.1.5show most of the existing datafor the proton electric and magnetic form factorsGpEand GpM/µp, respectively, normalized toGD, over theentire measured Q2 range. While not comprehensive,the data shown are sufficiently representative of theQ2coverage and precision of the entire world data. Thepoints shown as empty circles in Figs.10.1.4 and 10.1.5are published point extractions ofGpE andGpM based on0.00.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.1−0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7D/G n EG World dataGlobal fit (Ye 2018)Fig. 10.1.6 World data for neutron electric form factorGnE/GD. See text for references, details.
02 4 6 8 10 12 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2) D G n µ /( n MG World dataGlobal fit (Ye 2018)Fig. 10.1.7 World data for neutron magnetic form factorGnM/GD. See text for references, details.
direct L/T separations from Rosenbluth plots, and aretaken from Refs. [2904, 2906–2914]. These extractionsare not entirely independent of each other in terms ofcross section input, as several of the analyses combineddata from multiple experiments at similarQ2 values.
The points shown as filled circles in Fig.10.1.4 arebased on direct measurements of the ratioGpE/GpM us-ing polarization observables, converted toGpE/GD val-ues using the global fit toGpM from Ref. [1080]. Thepolarization data forGpE include measurements basedon the polarization transfer technique of Eq. (10.1.16)(Refs. [2915–2928]), and the beam-target double-spinasymmetrymethod,Eq.( 10.1.14)[2929–2931].Thepointslabeled ”Bernauer 2014” in Figures10.1.4 and 10.1.5are the direct Rosenbluth separations from the MainzA1 dataset [581, 2900]. The points at very lowQ2 la-beled ”Simon 1980” and ”Xiong 2019” in Fig.10.1.4 aredirect extractions ofGpE from individual cross sectionmeasurements based on the assumption of form factor10.1 Form factors 353scaling (GpM = µpGpE) in the case of Ref. [2932], orusing the Kelly fit to GpM( [574]) in the case of Ref.
[2901]. In Fig. 10.1.5, the GpM values extracted fromthe cross sections published in Refs. [2902, 2903] arebasedontheupdatedanalysisinRef.[ 2904],whichusedthe ”state-of-the-art” radiative corrections described inRef. [2933]. It must also be noted that the global fitsshown in Figs.10.1.4,10.1.5 include phenomenologicaltwo-photon-exchange corrections that have not beenapplied to the published form factor extractions. Thesecorrections tend to increase the value ofGpM by roughly2-3% in theQ2 range where the discrepancy betweenRosenbluth and polarization results is largest.
The extraction of nucleon form factors from crosssection measurements generally requires corrections toaccount for the effects of higher-order QED radiativeprocesses in order to isolate the OPE term from whichG2E and/or G2M can be determined. While each of thesehigher-order terms is at leastO(α) relative to the Bornterm, their combined effect on the observed cross sec-tions can be significant; typically as much as 10-30% atmodest-to-large Q2 [2934]. As a general rule, the magni-tude of the radiative correction (RC) to the elastic crosssection tends to increase at largeQ2 values and/or largeθe/small ϵ, and also depends on experiment-specific pa-rameters including detector acceptance and resolution,electron beam properties, and target geometry, mate-rial, and density. Additionally, the calculation of theRC depends strongly on whether the experiment de-tects the scattered electron only (most common), therecoil proton only (see, e.g., Ref. [2913]), or both final-state particles. For many experiments, the RC calcu-lation is an important source of uncertainty in the ex-traction of the Born cross section, which is not directlyobservable, and can dramatically change the slope ofthe Rosenbluth plot in converting measured cross sec-tions to Born cross sections [2934].
Atnext-to-leadingorderin α,the”standard”,model-independent RC to ep → ep scattering include vac-uumpolarization,vertex,andself-energytermsthatarepurely virtual and depend only onQ2, Bremsstrahlung(real photon emission), which depends strongly on bothQ2 and ϵ and modifies the reaction kinematics, andtwo-photon-exchange (TPE), in the limit where oneof the two exchanged photons is ”soft”. The contribu-tion of ”hard” TPE, in which both exchanged photonscarry a ”large” momentum, cannot presently be calcu-lated model-independently, and is neglected in the stan-dard radiative correction procedures. It is thought to belargely responsible for the discrepancy between crosssections and polarization observables [2935] in high-Q2extractions ofGpE, and is presently the subject of vigor-ous worldwide experimental and theoretical investiga-tion. For a recent review of the subject, see Ref. [2936].
For conventional RC, most of the earlier publishedextractionsoftheprotonformfactorsreliedontheworkof Tsai [2937] or Mo and Tsai [2938]. Following the ini-tial discovery of the rapid fall-off ofGpE/GpM at largeQ2 using polarization transfer [2916], and the result-ing large discrepancy between two different observablessensitive (in principle) to the same fundamental prop-erty of the proton, Maximon and Tjon [2939] refinedthe mathematical treatment of these corrections andremoved many of the approximations made in the ex-pressions of Mo and Tsai, including an exact calcula-tion of the soft Bremsstrahlung contributions. Severalauthors [2904, 2933, 2940] have recently examined thequantitative differences between the calculations of Ref.
[2938] and the more accurate approach of Ref. [2939],and studied the impact of these differences on previ-ously published extractions of the form factors. Updat-ing the published cross sections to use the more modernRC prescriptions is a non-trivial undertaking, especiallyfor the older experiments, since the required modifi-cations depend on details of the experiments and theassociated data analyses that in some cases were notthoroughly documented in the final publications.
The most recent and comprehensive effort thus farto update published elastic ep cross sections to use”state-of-the-art” RC in the high-Q2 region was de-scribed in Ref. [2904]. The reanalysis focused on a sub-setofhigh- Q2 experimentsfromJeffersonLabandSLACfor which the original publications provided sufficientdetails of the experimental parameters and the RC pre-scriptions and cutoffs used that they could be correctedin a self-consistent way [2904]. As noted by the authorsof [2904] and earlier by [2933], the effect of updatingthe RC to the older SLAC data is to reduce, but noteliminate, the magnitude and significance of the dis-crepancy in the high-Q2 region. The new, precise crosssections from Jefferson Lab’s Hall A [2904] extend theQ2 range for which a statistically significant discrep-ancy between cross sections and polarization observ-ables is established.
In the polarization transfer method, the simulta-neous measurement of the recoil nucleon polarizationcomponents Pt and Pℓ offers many advantages in thecontrol of experimental uncertainties. In particular, theform factor ratio can be determined in a single measure-ment, eliminating uncertainties resulting from changesin experimental parameters such as the beam energy,detector angles, spectrometer magnetic field settings,targetpolarizationandspindirection,andothers.More-over, the beam polarization and many other sources ofsystematic uncertainty associated with recoil nucleon354 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONpolarimetry cancel in the ratio Pt/Pℓ, see, e.g., Ref.
[2925], and reversal of the electron beam helicity re-verses the direction of the recoil nucleon polarizationwhileleavingallotherexperimentalparametersunchang-ed, providing for robust cancellation of systematic ef-fects associated with polarimeter acceptance and/or de-tection efficiency [2941]. The dramatically different be-havior ofGpE implied by the polarization data has pro-found implications for theoretical modeling of nucleonstructure, as discussed below.
While polarization measurements of GE/GM aregenerally thought to have small systematic uncertain-ties, it must be noted that the published data exhibitsignificant internal tension in the region 0.1-1 GeV2whereseveralhigh-precisionexperimentsgivesomewhatconflicting results [2918, 2926–2928, 2930]. Despite thisunresolved tension, polarization observables are gener-ally regarded as giving the most reliable determinationof GpE at large Q2 values, due to their superior sensi-tivity to GE as compared to the Rosenbluth method,and their relative insensitivity to radiative corrections[2942–2944]andhigher-orderQEDcorrectionsneglectedby the standard RC procedures, such as hard Two-Photon-Exchange (TPE) [2924, 2925]. This propertyderives from the fact that polarization asymmetries areratios of polarized and unpolarized cross sections, thattend to be affected similarly by radiative processes. ThePt/Pℓ ratio in the polarization transfer method is a ra-tio of such ratios, and the model-independent RC tothis ratio tend to be utterly negligible compared tothe uncertainties in the presently measured range ofQ2[2925]. Moreover, a precise search for evidence of hardTPE contributions in this observable found no signifi-cant effect [2924] at 2.5 GeV2, with the ratioµpGpE/GpMshowing no variation withϵ in the range0.15-0.8 with≈1% total uncertainties.
Assuming that polarization measurements give the”true” value ofGpE, the fractional contribution of theϵG2E term to the OPE cross section falls rapidly withQ2, as shown in Fig.10.1.2. Based on the global fit ofRef. [1080], the electric term contributes at most 10%of σR at 2 (GeV/c)2, 2% at 5 (GeV/c)2, and even less athigherQ2,basicallywipingoutanymeaningfulsensitiv-ity toGE, since its contribution toσR becomes compa-rable to the limits of experimental accuracy and to theexpected magnitude of higher-order QED correctionsthat are theoretically and experimentally uncertain.
In addition to efforts to resolve the difficulties withGpE at large Q2, there has been a renewed effort toimprove the precision of elasticep scattering data atvery lowQ2, since the CREMA collaboration first pub-lished an extremely precise extraction of the proton ra-dius from Lamb shift measurements in muonic hydro-gen [2945], yielding a radius of about 0.84 fm, smallerby roughly seven standard deviations than the previousconsensus value (at the time) of 0.88 fm from electron-proton scattering and spectroscopy of ordinary hydro-gen. The Mainz A1 collaboration [581, 2900] carriedout a systematic program of over 1,400 precision crosssection measurements spanning the Q2 range 0.003-1GeV2 using the ”traditional” method based on mag-netic spectrometers. They published several direct fitsof GpE and GpM to their cross section data, testing var-ious functional forms to accurately quantify the uncer-tainties. They also published direct L/T separations forQ2 ≳ 0.02 GeV2. While the MainzGpE extraction is ingood agreement with the rest of the world data, theirGpM results, whether from global fits or direct L/T sep-arations, are in significant tension with the other worlddata102, as is evident from Fig.10.1.5. The slower fall-off with Q2 of the Mainz GpM implies a smaller mag-netic radius; indeed, the published Mainz extraction ofthe proton magnetic radiusrpM is about three standarddeviations below the consensus of extractions based onother world data.
More recently, the PRad collaboration [2901] per-formed newep→ep cross section measurements usinga novel, magnetic-spectrometer-free method involvingprecision calorimetry, a windowless gas target, and asimultaneous measurement of the pure electroweak pro-cess of Möller scattering (e−e− →e−e−) to constrainthe absolute cross section normalization. Their mea-surements reached a minimumQ2 of 0.0002 GeV2 withsmall statistical and systematic uncertainties, achievinga proton radius measurement ofrp ≈0.83 ±0.01 fm,consistent with the muonic hydrogen value.
Figure 10.1.8 shows the PRad and Mainz cross sec-tion data, normalized to the ”standard dipole” crosssection, calculated from Eq. (10.1.9) under the assump-tion GpE = GpM/µp = GD. The low end of the PRadQ2range is in a regime where the cross section is indistin-guishable from point-like behavior within experimentalprecision; at the lowestQ2 of the PRad dataset,G2D ≈0.999. This is unsurprising given that the de Brogliewavelength of the virtual photonλ= ℏc/√Q2 ≈13 fmis large compared torp at thisQ2.
Neutron data and discussionTheneutronelectromagneticformfactorsaremuchmoredifficult to measure accurately than those of the proton,due primarily to the absence of free neutron targetsof sufficient density for electron scattering experimentsat large Q2. The small cross sections for high-energy102 Note, however, that the Mainz dataset implies aGpE/GpMratio that is consistent with the high-precision polarizationmeasurements by Zhanet al. , Ref. [2927]10.1 Form factors 3554−103 −102 −101 −101 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.900.951.001.051.101.151.20D σ / σ PRad 1.1 GeVPRad 2.2 GeV Mainz A1, 180 MeVMainz A1, 315 MeV Mainz A1, 450 MeVMainz A1, 585 MeV Mainz A1, 720 MeVMainz A1, 855 MeV Fig. 10.1.8 Comparison of PRad [2901] and Mainz A1 [581]elastic ep → ep cross sections, normalized to the ”standarddipole” cross sectionσD, calculated from Eq. (10.1.9) assumingGpE = GpM/µp = GD; i.e.,ϵ(1 + τ)σD/σMott = G2D(ϵ+ µ2pτ)electromagnetic interactions can generally only be mea-sured accurately in high-luminosity experiments, andthe neutron’s instability and zero charge severely limitthe number of free neutrons that can be collected in asuitably small volume for a suitable duration for suchexperiments. As such, essentially all knowledge of neu-tron electromagnetic form factors at meaningfully largeQ2 values comes from measurements of electron scat-tering on bound neutrons in light nuclear targets suchas deuterium and3He.
Since GnE(0) = 0 , the cross section for elastic enscattering is dominated by the magnetic term over es-sentially the entire measuredQ2 range, even at rela-tively low Q2. The neutron form factors are accessi-ble experimentally through a number of scattering ob-servables on light nuclear targets, including cross sec-tions and spin asymmetries. Model-dependent extrac-tions of neutron elastic form factors from measurementsof elastic electron-deuteron scattering have also beenattempted at relatively lowQ2 values (see, e.g., [2946–2949]), but are subject to large theoretical and exper-imental systematic uncertainties, and are generally con-sideredlessreliablethanextractionsfrommeasurementsof quasi-elastic scattering on bound nucleons in deu-teriumand/orHelium-3,althoughtheyarequalitativelyconsistent.
Figures 10.1.6 and 10.1.7 show most of the existingdata for GnE and GnM, respectively, excluding extrac-tions based on elasticed cross section measurements.
For GnE, essentially all reliable data of reasonable pre-cision come from measurements of polarization observ-ables, since the (quasi)-elastic(e,e′n) cross section hasrelativelylowsensitivityto GnE overtheentire Q2 range.
The data shown in Fig.10.1.6 include extractions fromasymmetry measurements on polarized deuterium tar-gets (Refs. [2950–2953]), polarized 3He targets (Refs.
[2954–2958]), and via recoil neutron polarization on un-polarized deuterium (Refs. [2959–2961]).
The most reliable known method to determine theneutron magnetic form factorGnM is the so-called ”ra-tio” or ”Durand” technique [2962], in which ”neutron-tagged”and”proton-tagged”quasi-elasticelectronscat-tering on a deuterium target are measured simultane-ously,andtheratioofcrosssections 2H(e,e′n)p/2H(e,e′p)nis measured. The simultaneous measurement of quasi-free scattering on bound protons and neutrons in deu-terium, combined with the precise knowledge of thefree proton cross section, allows a determination of thefree neutron cross section with very small uncertain-ties. In particular, the electron acceptance and detec-tion efficiency, the data acquisition deadtime, and theluminosity cancel exactly in then/p ratio, and nucleareffects such as Fermi motion and binding, final-stateinteractions, meson-exchange currents, and others, aswell as QED radiative corrections, tend to affect thed(e,e′n)pandd(e,e′p)ncross sections nearly identically[2963], for sufficiently tight cuts on the photon-nucleoninvariant massW2, and the angleθpq between the de-tected nucleon’s momentum and the momentum trans-fer direction, determined from the scattered electron’skinematics, to ensure exclusivity of the reaction. Themain source of experimental uncertainty with the ratiomethod is in the knowledge of the acceptance/detectionefficiency for protons and neutrons. Of the data shownin Fig.10.1.7, Refs. [2963–2967] used the ratio method,Refs. [2968–2971] extractedGnM from the beam-targetdouble-spin asymmetry in inclusive quasielastic elec-tron scattering on polarized Helium-3, and Refs. [2972–2974] extracted GnM from absolute cross section mea-surements in either inclusive scattering on deuteriumor coincidence d(e,e′n)p scattering. The low-Q2 datafor GnM show some inconsistencies, suggesting underes-timated theoretical or experimental systematic uncer-tainties in some of the older measurements. The SuperBigBite Spectrometer (SBS) Collaboration in JeffersonLab’s Hall A recently collected data using the ratiomethod to extend the knowledge ofGnM to Q2 = 13 .5GeV2 with very small statistical and systematic un-certainties. The CEBAF Large Acceptance Spectrome-ter (CLAS) collaboration in Jefferson Lab’s Hall B hasalso collected data forGnM up toQ2 ≈10 GeV2, withqualitativelydifferentsourcesofsystematicuncertainty.
Both datasets are currently under analysis.356 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEON10.1.4 Theoretical interpretation of nucleon formfactorsAsthespacelikeelectromagneticformfactorsareamongthesimplest,mostclearlyinterpretable,andbest-knownmeasurable dynamical properties of the nucleon, theyconstitute important benchmarks for testing theoreti-cal models. Figure10.1.9 shows the world data for thenucleon’s spacelike EMFFs together with selected the-oretical models and the expected results from the on-going high-Q2 form factor program in Hall A at Jef-ferson Lab by the Super BigBite Spectrometer (SBS)collaboration. The SBS measurements of the neutronmagnetic form factor were completed during the Oct.
2021-Feb. 2022 running period in Hall A, and the dataare currently under analysis. The SBS measurement ofGnE/GnM using a polarized3He target is underway as ofOctober 2022 and will run through March of 2023, andthe polarization transfer measurements ofGnE/GnM andGpE/GpM are expected to take data in 2023-2024. Theexpansion of theQ2 range and precision of the protonand neutron data will severely test theoretical modelsof nucleon structure.
The calculation of nucleon structure from first prin-ciples in QCD is presently only possible using the meth-ods of lattice gauge theory. The accuracy of latticeQCD calculations is rapidly improving with increasesin computing power and improvements in the control ofsystematic errors, and the range of measurable quanti-ties lattice QCD can predict continues to expand. Nev-ertheless, the prediction of nucleon form factors andother observables of hard exclusive processes from lat-tice QCD (see Refs. [573, 575, 2979, 2980] and refer-ences therein for recent efforts at low and highQ2) hasnot yet reached a level of precision and accuracy com-mensurate with that of the experimental data, partic-ularly at high energies. As such, its predictions cannotyet be conclusively ”tested” by the form factor data.
Instead, the existing data serve to guide the improve-ment of the calculations. Meanwhile, the continued useof QCD-inspired phenomenological models, approxima-tions, effective theories, and continuum methods pro-vides valuable insight and improved understanding ofthe relevant degrees of freedom and dynamical effectsat different energy scales when compared to the data.
Forasymptoticallylarge Q2 values,perturbativeQCD(pQCD) predicts the scaling behavior of the nucleonform factors based on simple constituent counting rulesand helicity conservation [207]. The predictions for thenucleon,withitsthree-quarkvalencestructure,are F1 ∝Q−4 and F2 ∝Q−6 (see the discussion in Sec.5.10).
While the proton data at the highest measuredQ2 val-ues are in superficial qualitative agreement with thepQCD scaling predictions, it has been argued [2981,2982] that the pQCD mechanism of multiple hard gluonexchange is not applicable to exclusive processes in thepresently accessible range ofQ2. More recently, Belit-sky et al. considered the effects of both leading andsubleading twist contributions to the nucleon’s light-cone wavefunctions in a pQCD analysis of the Pauliform factorF2, deriving the modified logarithmic scal-ing expressionQ2F2/F1 ∝ln2 (Q2/Λ2), with a range ofvalues ofΛ≈200−300 MeV describing the proton datarather well [2983]. However, in an analysis of the quarkflavor decomposition of the spacelike FFs [2984] shortlyfollowing the publication of data forGnE/GnM up to 3.4(GeV/c)2 [2954] andGnM up to 4.8 (GeV/c)2 [2963], itwas noted that the neutron Fn2 /Fn1 data do not fol-low this logarithmic scaling, at least not for values ofΛsimilar to those fitting the proton data.
Dispersiontheoreticalanalysis,includingmodelsbasedon the assumption of Vector Meson Dominance (VMD)[2985], provide a coherent, self-consistent framework forthe joint interpretation of spacelike and timelike nu-cleon form factors over the entire physical range ofQ2.
VMD-based models were among the earliest to describethe global features of the nucleon form factors and pre-dicted the high-Q2 falloff of GpE/GpM decades beforethe polarization transfer experiments. A key assump-tion of VMD and VMD-based models is that the vir-tual photon-nucleon interaction at low to intermediateQ2 is dominated by vector meson pole terms, whichcontribute significantly to the dispersion integrals con-necting the spacelike and timelike regions through therequirements of unitarity and analyticity of the formfactors considered as functions of q2 in the complexplane. For a recent review of the dispersion theoreticalanalysis of nucleon EMFFs, see Ref. [2986].
As mentioned above, in the very low-energy limit,when target recoil can be neglected, the form factorscan be interpreted as three-dimensional Fourier trans-forms of the spatial distributions of charge (GE) andcurrent (GM) in the nucleon. While this naive den-sity interpretation is invalidated by relativity for finitemomentum transfers, several authors have extractedthree-dimensional rest-frame densities from the formfactors using model-dependent relativistic prescriptionsto relate the Sachs form factors measured at a four-momentum transferQ2 to the static rest frame densi-ties. A common feature of such extractions is the iden-tification of the Sachs form factorsGE and GM withFourier transforms of the Breit frame103 charge and103 The Breit or ”brick-wall” frame in elasticeN scattering isthe frame in which there is no energy transfer in the collision.
It is related to the nucleon rest frame by a boost along themomentum transfer direction, with a boost factorγ = √1 + τ.10.1 Form factors 357010 20 30 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.00.51.0) D G p µ /( pMG Xu 2021Lomon 2002 Diehl 2005Gross 2008 Segovia 2014Cloet 2012 05 10 15 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.5−0.00.51.01.5pM/G pEG p µ Global fit (Ye 2018)05 10 15 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.00.51.0) D G n µ /( n MG world data nMG Rosenbluth pE,MG polarizationp,nEGChristy 2022 Kirk 1973Sill 1993 05 10 15 2 (GeV/c)2Q0.5−0.00.51.01.5nM/G n E G n µ SBS projectedSBS GEN-RP projectedFig. 10.1.9 Data for all four nucleon electromagnetic form factors at spacelikeQ2 with selected theoretical models, the globalfit from [1080], and the projected results from the ongoing SBS program at Jefferson Lab, plotted arbitrarily at the values fromthe global fit. Theoretical curves shown are the BLFQ calculations of Ref. [949] (Xu 2021), the VMD-based model of Ref. [2975](Lomon 2002), the GPD-based model of Ref. [2976] (Diehl 2005), the covariant spectator model of Ref. [2977] (Gross 2008), theDSE-based calculation of Ref. [2771] (Segovia 2014), and the quark-diquark model of Ref. [2978] (Cloet 2012). Data references arethe same as those given in the text and described in the captions of Figs.10.1.4, 10.1.5, 10.1.6, and10.1.7. See text for details.
current densities. The Breit frame densities are thenmodified by a boost factor k2 = Q2/(1 + τ) relatingQ2 to the wave numberk in the nucleon rest frame,and another model-dependent factor relating the SachsFF to the so-called ”intrinsic” form factors ˜ρ(k), de-fined as Fourier-Bessel transforms of the rest frame den-sities. The latter correction attempts to account forthe Q2-dependent boost of the nucleon wavefunctionitself from the rest frame to the Breit frame. Kelly[2987] used expansions in a complete set of radial basisfunctions and a relativistic boost prescription consis-tent with the pQCD asymptotic behavior to minimizemodel-dependenceandestimatetheuncertaintiesintheradial densities due to the finiteQ2 range of the data.
Among his key findings were a broader charge densityfor the proton compared to its magnetization density,consistent with the fall-off of the polarization data forGpE/GpM, and a neutron charge density described by apositive core surrounded by a negative exterior, consis-tent with pion-cloud models.
Whilethethree-dimensionalradialdensitiesextractedfrom the form factors are necessarily model-dependent,a model-independent density interpretation of the formfactors exists through sum rules relating the form fac-tors to moments of Generalized Parton Distributions(GPDs) [1085]. Miller [2988, 2989] showed that in theinfinite momentum frame, the impact-parameter-spacedensities of chargeand magnetization in the nucleonaretwo-dimensional Fourier-Bessel transforms of the Dirac(F1) and Pauli (F2) form factors, respectively. Exam-ples of empirical extractions of the transverse densitiesfrom the form factor data can be found in Refs. [2810,2990]. In apparent contrast to model-dependent extrac-tions of 3D rest frame densities such as Kelly’s, theneutron’s transverse charge density exhibits a negative358 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONcore surrounded by a positive exterior, contradictingthe qualitative predictions of several models.
The form factors also play an important role in ef-forts to extract the GPDs from measurements of DeeplyVirtual Compton Scattering (DVCS) and other hardexclusive processes. Through the aforementioned sumrules, the form factors F1 and F2 impose fairly pow-erful constraints on, respectively, the vector(H) andtensor (E) GPDs that enter the Ji sum rule for the nu-cleon spin decomposition [1085]. If good measurementsand/or models of the GPDs exist, they can be usedto predict the form factors [2991]. Alternatively, whencombined with the forward parton distributions mea-sured in deep inelastic scattering, the form factors canbeusedtoconstraintheGPDs[ 2976,2992],particularlyat high Bjorkenx and/or large−t. Apart from the di-rect constraints, precise knowledge of the form factorsis also required for analysis of experiments attemptingto measure GPDs, to separate the contributions of theDVCS and Bethe-Heitler processes, which interfere atthe same order in α and are experimentally indistin-guishable.
Constituent quark models (CQMs) have a long his-tory in nuclear physics and predate the emergence ofQCDastheacceptedtheoryofstronginteractionswithinthe Standard Model. For a review and modern perspec-tive on the role of the quark model in nuclear physics,see [476]. The early non-relativistic constituent quarkmodel was successful in explaining the observed spec-tra of baryons and mesons asqqq (fermionic) and q¯q(bosonic) bound states, and making qualitative predic-tions of meson and baryon masses and magnetic mo-ments. Indeed, one of the original motivations for theintroduction of the color quantum number prior to thedevelopment of QCD was to preserve the Pauli exclu-sion principle for low-lying baryon states, whose com-bined spin/flavor/orbital quantum numbers are sym-metric under the exchange of any two quarks. This issuewas particularly acute for the spin-3/2 baryon decuplet.
To explain dynamical properties of hadrons in terms ofconstituent quarks, a model for the confining quark-quark interaction and the resulting quark wavefunc-tions is needed. The ”bare”uand dvalence quark con-stituents of nucleons appearing in the QCD Lagrangianare almost massless compared to the nucleon mass. Assuch, the nucleon, considered as the ground state ofa bound system of three light quarks, is characterizedby a large ratio of binding energy to constituent mass,making a fully relativistic treatment mandatory to ob-tain realistic phenomenology and accurate descriptionsof the data. A common feature of CQM calculations ofnucleon structure is the ”dressing” of the bare, almost-massless valence quarks by gluons and quark-antiquarkpairs, leading to massive constituent quarks and/or di-quarks as effective degrees of freedom, often carryingtheir own internal structure. While a full review of rela-tivistic constituent quark model calculations of nucleonform factors is beyond the scope of this section, a fairlycomprehensive overview is given in Ref. [2993] (see alsoSec. 5).
In recent years, Hamiltonian light-front field theoryhas emerged as a useful framework for the nonperturba-tive solution of invariant masses and correlated partonamplitudes of self-bound systems [929]. Xu et al. re-cently applied this framework to calculate the structureof the nucleon using the method of Basis Light FrontQuantization (BLFQ) [949]; see also Sec.5.4. Their cal-culation used an effective light-front Hamiltonian withquarks as the only effective degrees of freedom, a trans-verse confining potential from light-front holographysupplementedbya longitudinal confinement,and a one-gluon-exchange interaction with a fixed coupling. Thelight-front wave functions resulting from the solutionof this Hamiltonian were then used to calculate the nu-cleon form factors, parton distributions, and other dy-namical properties. The first form factor results fromBLFQ [949], solved in the valence space of three quarks,are compared to the data and a selection of other theo-retical models in Fig.10.1.9. Such comparisons indicatethe need for improvements to the magnetic form factorswithin BLFQ, particularly in the low-Q2 region. Aug-menting the BLFQ basis with dynamical gluons mayprovide such improvements [961].
In recent years, significant progress has occurred inthe explanation and prediction of a wide range of mea-surable dynamical properties of hadrons in continuumnon-perturbative QCD [829], within the framework ofDyson-Schwinger Equations (DSE). In this framework,the high-Q2 behavior of proton and neutron form fac-tors is very sensitive to the behavior of the momentum-dependent dressed quark mass function that governsthe transition from massive, constituent-quark-like be-havior at low energies to light, parton-like behavior athigh energies [2818]. Moreover, the flavor decomposi-tion of the form factors enabled by combined protonand neutron measurements, soon to be extended toQ2values up to 10 GeV2, has the potential to elucidatethe importance of diquark correlations in nucleon struc-ture [758, 2978]. Over the longer term, looking pastthe ongoing SBS program, major efforts are underwayto establish intense polarized and unpolarized positronbeams at Jefferson Lab, which will facilitate precisee+p/e−p comparisons over a much larger range ofQ2and ϵ than presently available, hopefully leading to adecisive resolution of the Rosenbluth/polarization dis-crepancy for the proton, as part of a larger physics pro-10.2 Parton distributions 359gramusingpositronbeams[ 2994].TheplannedElectron-Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory shouldbe capable of measuring the elastic ep cross sectionsto a Q2 of up to 40-50 (GeV/c)2 [2995]. A proposed”low-cost” upgrade [2996] of Jefferson Lab’s Continu-ous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) to amaximum energy of 20+ GeV using fixed-field alternat-ing gradient magnets to achieve 6-7 additional passesthrough the CEBAF linear accelerators would enablefurther expansions of the Q2 reach for GpE, GnE, andGnM to at least 20 GeV2.
10.2 Parton distributionsW ally Melnitchouk10.2.1 Theoretical foundationsParton distribution functions are the prototypical ex-amples of QCD quantum correlation functions, whichallow high-energy lepton and/or hadron scattering pro-cesses to be described in terms of quarks and gluons(or partons) (for reviews see Refs. [2997–3001]). ThePDF for a quark of flavori in a nucleon (moving withmomentum p) is defined by the Fourier transform ofa forward matrix element of quark bilinear operators,which in theA+ = 0 gauge can be written asfi/N(x,µ2) = 14π∫dz− e−ixp+z−×⟨N(p)|¯ψi(z−) γ+ ψi(0)|N(p)⟩, (10.2.1)where ψi is the quark field operator,xis the light-conemomentum fraction of the proton carried bythe parton,and µ is the renormalization scale. Analagous expres-sions can be written for antiquark and gluon PDFs, thelatter in terms of the gluon field strength tensor,FAµν.
The utility of PDFs is that they allow one to relatevarious high-energy scattering reactions, which wouldotherwise not be easily related to one another, andmake predictions for new reactions in terms of the sameset of PDFs obtained from previous experiments. Thekey to this is the ability to factorize the scatteringprocess into a process-dependent, perturbatively cal-culable hard scattering cross section and the process-independent,nonperturbativefunctionparametrizedbythe PDF. An important virtue of PDFs is that in theinfinite momentum frame (or on the light-front) theycan be simply interpreted as probability densities de-scribing how the proton’s momentum is shared amongstthe different parton constituents, as a function of thefraction x of the proton’s momentum carried by theparton [1341].
Since quarks and gluons have nonzero spin, the fun-damental distributions are the PDFs for a specific he-licity (spin projection along the direction of motion),f↑i and f↓i , corresponding to parton spins aligned andantialigned with the proton spin, respectively. Unpo-larized scattering experiments are therefore only sensi-tive to sums of the helicity PDFs,fi = f↑i + f↓i , whilemeasurements involving polarized beams and/or tar-gets are required to obtain information on differences,∆fi = f↑i −f↓i .
Traditionally, PDFs have been determined in globalQCD analyses by simultaneously fitting a wide varietyof data for large momentum transfer processes. Typi-cally, the PDFs are parametrized in terms of some func-tional form, the parameters of which are determinedby fitting the calculated cross sections to data. Oncethe PDFs are determined at some initial momentumtransfer scale, the DGLAPQ2 evolution equations (seeSec. 2.3) are used to compute them at all other scalesneeded for the calculations. The standard data setsused in global analyses include deep-inelastic scattering(DIS) of charged leptons from proton or nuclear tar-gets (or neutrinos from heavy nuclei), Drell-Yan (DY)inclusive lepton-pair production in hadron-hadron scat-tering, and the production of photons,W± orZbosons,or jets at large transverse momentum in hadronic colli-sions (see Sec.10.2.2). We discuss the specific reactionsand relevant data sets in more detail in the following.
10.2.2 Physical processes and experimental ob-servablesHistorically, the main source of information on protonPDFs has been the deep-inelastic scattering (DIS) ofleptons from protons or nuclei, starting from the pio-neering experiments at SLAC in the late 1960s. In theone-boson exchange approximation, the differential DIScross section can be written as a product of leptonic andhadronic tensors,d2σdΩdE′ ∼αLµνWµν,where α is the fine structure constant, Ω = Ω(θ,φ)is the laboratory solid angle of the scattered lepton,and E′ is the scattered lepton energy. Using constraintsfrom Lorentz and gauge invariance, the hadronic ten-sor Wµν can be decomposed into several independentterms,Wµν = −˜gµνF1 + ˜pµ˜pνp·q F2 + iϵµναβ pαqβF3+ iϵµναβqαp·q[sβg1 +(sβ −s·qp·qpβ)g2], (10.2.2)360 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONwhere pµ and qµ are the nucleon and exchanged bo-son four-momenta, ˜gµν = gµν −qµqν/q2, and ˜pµ =pµ −(p·q/q2)qµ. The nucleon polarization four-vectorsβ satisfies s2 = −1 and p·s= 0 . The structure func-tions F1,2,3 and g1,2 contain the complete informationabout the structure of the nucleon in DIS, and are gen-erally functions of two variables, conventionally chosento be the Bjorken scaling variablex= Q2/2p·qand theexchanged boson virtualityQ2. In the Bjorken limit, inwhich bothQ2 and p·q →∞ (or invariant final statehadron massW2 = (p+q)2 = M2 +Q2(1−x)/x→∞),but x is fixed, the structure functions become simplefunctions ofx only.
Unpolarized scatteringFor spin-averaged scattering, the nucleon structure isparametrized in terms of the vectorF1 and F2 structurefunctions, and the vector-axial vector interferenceF3structure function, which requires weak currents. Ac-cording to QCD factorization theorems, the structurefunctions Fj(j = 1 ,2,3), can be written in factorizedform as convolutions of hard coefficient functions andPDFs, weighted by respective electroweak charges,Fj(x,Q2) =∑i=q,¯q,ge2i[Cji ⊗fi](x,Q2), (10.2.3)wheretheconvolutionsymbolisdefinedby [A⊗B](x) =∫1x(dy/y)A(x)B(x/y). The coefficient functionsCij canbe computed perturbatively in a series inαs. At leadingorder (LO) inαs, Cij is aδ function, and the structurefunctions reduce to linear combinations of the PDFs,F1(x) = 12∑qe2qq+(x), (10.2.4a)F2(x) = 2 xF1(x), (10.2.4b)F3(x) = 2∑qgqV gqAq−(x), (10.2.4c)where q± = q±¯q denote theC-even (odd) flavor com-binations, and we use the short-hand notationq(x) ≡fq(x) or ¯q(x) ≡f¯q(x) for a quark or antiquark PDF offlavor q in the proton, andg(x) ≡fg(x) for the gluonPDF. TheF3 structure function vanishes for photon ex-change, but is nonzero for the exchange of weak bosons,with gqV(A) representing the vector (axial vector) cou-pling of the boson to the quarkq. Equations (10.2.4)correspond to the simple parton model of inclusive DIS,in which the structure functions are interpreted as par-ton densities. At finite energies, the logarithmic Q2dependence from the evolution equations described inSec. 2.3, as well as residualQ2 dependence associatedwith power corrections (see below), give corrections tothe simple parton model expectations. (Note also thatat LO the Bjorkenxvariable coincides with the partonmomentum fraction; however, at higher orders these aredifferent.)Many DIS experiments have been performed withcharged lepton beams on proton targets, which for neu-tralcurrentsintheone-photonexchangeapproximationconstraintheflavorcombination 4u++d++s+ (Zbosonexchange would involve a different linear combinationof PDFs, involving the weak mixing angle,sin2 θW). Fora neutron, the corresponding linear combination wouldbe 4d+ + u+ + s+. In practice, free neutron targets donot exist, so deuterium is often used as a proxy, whichthen requires nuclear corrections be made to extract thefree neutron structure information (see Sec.10.2.3).
Charged current neutrino and antineutrino interac-tions constrain different combinations ofq+ orq− PDFsfor theF1,2 or F3 structure functions, respectively, de-pending on the type of target used, so that by combin-ing data on different targets and with different beamsone can in principle isolate specific combinations ofqor ¯q. A special case is provided by charm production inν and ¯ν DIS, which is sensitive to thes and ¯s PDFs,respectively (although in practice this involves heavytargets for which model-dependent nuclear correctionsmust be made).
The gluon PDF plays a lesser role in inclusive DIS,as it enters the cross sections at higher order,O(αs).
In practice, it is mainly constrained through theQ2 de-pendence of the structure functions, and the longitudi-nal structure functionFL, which depends on differencesat higher order between the left- and right-hand sidesof Eq. (10.2.4b). The strongest constraints ong(x) inDIS have come from the HERAepcollider data at verysmall x values [3002].
Since the PDFs are universal, the functions appear-ing in the DIS structure functions are the same as thosethat describe the structure of the incoming hadrons inhadronic collisions. In analogy with the QCD factor-ization for DIS, the cross section for the high energyscattering of hadronA (momentum pA) and hadronB(momentum pB) to an inclusive state in which a parti-cle C is identified (such as a vector boson, photon, orjet) can generally be written asσAB→CX(pA,pB) =∑a,b∫dxadxbfa/A(xa) fb/B(xb)×ˆσab→CX(xapA,xbpB), (10.2.5)where xa and xb are the corresponding parton momen-tumfractions,and ˆσab→CX isthepartoniccrosssection.
For vector boson production (W±, Z0, or lepton pairsproduced from virtual photons), the process proceedsat LO throughq¯q annihilation. In particular, the Drell-Yan lepton-pair production cross sections inppand pn10.2 Parton distributions 361collisions depend on the combinationsσpp ∼4u(xa) ¯u(xb) + d(xa) ¯d(xb) + ( xa ↔xb) + ···σpn ∼4d(xa) ¯d(xb) + u(xa) ¯u(xb) + ( xa ↔xb) + ···where the ellipses indicate contributions from heavierquarks. (The pn cross section is again obtained fromdeuterium data.) As we discuss below, ratios of thesecross sections at kinematics such thatxa ≫xb, wherethe hadronAcan be approximated by its valence struc-ture, can be used to constrain the¯d/¯uratio. In contrast,the inclusive production ofW± bosons constrains prod-ucts of the formq(xa) ¯q′(xb) with specific weights givenby the appropriate CKM matrix elements.
For p¯p collisions at the Tevatron, for example, atlarge values of rapidity (very asymmetric values ofxaand xb) at LO one hasσW+∼u(xa) d(xb) + ¯d(xa) ¯u(xb) + ···σW−∼d(xa) u(xb) + ¯u(xa) ¯d(xb) + ···where the PDFs in the antiproton have been relatedto those in the proton. For large and positive rapidity,xa > xb and the antiquark PDFs can be neglected, sothat these cross sections depend only on theu and dPDFs. Because of the missing neutrino resulting fromthe W decays, one cannot directly reconstruct the ra-pidity distributions, and typically the charged leptonrapidity asymmetry for W± production is presented.
The decay process means that the constraints on thePDFs are less direct, but such measurements still pro-vide useful constraints on the d/u ratio at moderatevalues ofx.
Recent data from the ATLAS Collaboration at theLHC [3003, 3004] onW± and Z production and decaysuggested a rather larger strange quark sea than tra-ditionally obtained from neutrino scattering, with theratio Rs = (s+ ¯s)/(¯u+ ¯d) ≈1.13 at parton momentumfraction x ≈0.02, compared with the traditionally ac-cepted value ofRs ≈0.4 from neutrino scattering. Incontrast, a simultaneous analysis of PDFs and fragmen-tation functions including semi-inclusive π± and K±production data, along with single-inclusivee+e− anni-hilation cross sections into hadrons [628, 3005], favoreda strong suppression of the strange PDF at intermedi-ate x values, correlating with an enhancement of thes →K− fragmentation function. The question of themagnitude and shape of the strange (and antistrange)PDF remains a topic of considerable phenomenologicalinterest.
Other observables that can constrain PDFs are in-clusive jet or photon, dijet, and photon + jet produc-tion cross sections. Generally, these have greater sen-sitivity to the gluon PDF at large x than DIS reac-tions. Dijet production triple differential cross sectionsyield more information than single jet cross sections be-cause the rapidity of the second jet is also constrained,thereby helping to constrain the momentum fractionsof the PDFs. Direct or isolated photon production canalso constrain the gluon PDF through the subprocessqg →γq [3006]. Photon + jet production offers similarconstraints, but now the subprocesses are weighted bythe squared charge of the parton to which the photoncouples. A summary of the kinematic coverage of theexisting datasets used to constraint unpolarized PDFsis shown in Fig.10.2.1.
Fig. 10.2.1 Kinematic coverage of datasets used in globalQCD analyses. The variable x represents Bjorken-x for DISand Feynman-xfor vector boson and jet production, while thescale Q2 represents the four-momentum transfer squared forDIS, the mass squared of the intermediate boson for vector bo-son production, and the transverse momentum squared for jetproduction. A DIS cut of W2 = 3 GeV2 is indicated in thebottom right hand corner (solid back line).
Polarized scatteringFor spin-dependent reactions, the structure functionsg1 and g2 are extracted from DIS measurements withlongitudinally polarized leptons scattered from a nu-cleon or nucleus that is polarized either longitudinallyor transversely relative to the beam. For longitudinalbeam and target polarization, the difference betweenthe cross sections for spins aligned and antialigned isdominated by the g1 structure function, while the g2structure function requires measurements with the tar-get polarized transversely to the beam polarization. Inpractice one often measures the polarization asymme-try A1, which is given as a ratio of spin-dependent andspin-averaged structure functions,A1 = 1F1(x)[g1(x) −4M2x2Q2 g2(x)], (10.2.6)where M is the nucleon mass. At small values ofx2/Q2,the asymmetry simplifies toA1 ≈g1/F1.
In analogy with the unpolarizedF1 structure func-tion, the structure functiong1 can be expressed at LO362 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONin terms of differences between quark distributions withspins aligned and antialigned with that of the nucleon,g1(x) = 12∑qe2q∆q+(x). (10.2.7)The g2 structure function, on the other hand, doesnot have a simple partonic interpretation. However, itsmeasurement provides information on the subleading,higher-twistcontributionswhichparametrizelong-rangemulti-parton correlations in the nucleon. The depen-dence on both spin-dependent and spin-averaged struc-ture functions inA1 illustrates the need to consistentlyanalyze both unpolarized and polarized PDFs simulta-neously, as will be discussed below.
Aswithunpolarizedmeasurements,historicallymostconstraints on spin-dependent PDFs have come frompolarized charged-lepton DIS experiments. For chargedlepton scattering from polarized proton targets, theg1structure function depends on the combination4∆u+ +∆d+ + ∆s+, while for the neutron the combinationwould be 4∆d+ + ∆u+ + ∆s+. In practice, polarized3He targets are usually used as effective sources of po-larized neutron, since the neutron carries almost 90%of the3He spin, while polarized deuterons, which haveequal proton and neutron spin contributions, are sensi-tivetotheisoscalarcombination 5(∆u++∆d+)+2∆s+.
At next-to-leading order (NLO), the polarized gluondistribution ∆galso enters in theg1 structure function.
The mixing with the quark flavor singlet contributionto g1 under Q2 evolution can then be used to provideconstraints on∆g.
Semi-inclusive DIS (SIDIS) provides additional in-dependent combinations of spin-dependent PDFs thatcan be used to separate individual quark and antiquarkflavors. At high energies, production of hadronsh inthe current fragmentation region, primarily pions orkaons,isproportionaltoproductsofPDFsandquark →hadron fragmentation functions. Typically, such exper-iments measure the semi-inclusive polarization asym-metry, which at LO can be written as a ratio of spin-dependent to spin-averaged SIDIS cross sections,Ah1 (x,z) =∑q e2q(∆q(x) Dhq(z) + ∆¯q(x) Dh¯q(z))∑q e2q(q(x) Dhq(z) + ¯q(x) Dh¯q(z)) ,(10.2.8)where Dhq(z) is the fragmentation function for the scat-tered quark to produce a hadronhwith a fractionz ofthe quark’s energy. For largez, the produced hadronhas a high probability of containing the scattered par-ton, providing a tag on the initial parton distribution.
The fragmentation functionsDhq can be determinedfrom other reactions, such as inclusive single hadronFig. 10.2.2 As in Fig.10.2.1 but for spin-dependent observ-ables.
production in e+e− annihilation or pp collisions. Onecan then weight particular quark or antiquark flavorsby selecting favored (such as Dπ+u or Dπ+¯d ) or unfa-vored (Dπ+d or Dπ+¯u ) fragmentation functions for spe-cific hadrons. The polarized strange quark PDF ∆s,in particular, can be constrained from SIDISK pro-duction data. The polarized gluon distribution∆g canalso be constrained from SIDIS data on charmed orhigh-pT hadron production through the photon–gluonfusion process.
Inclusive particle production in polarized proton–proton collisions provides an additional method of de-termining spin-dependent sea quark and gluon PDFs.
The cross sections for the production ofW± bosons inscattering longitudinally polarized protons from unpo-larized protons, ⃗ pp→W± X, depend on products ofspin-dependent and spin-averaged PDFs,∆σW+∼ ∆¯d(xa) u(xb) −∆u(xa) ¯d(xb),∆σW−∼ ∆¯u(xa) d(xb) −∆d(xa) ¯u(xb).
At large positive (negative) rapidities,xa ≫xb (xa ≪xb), the cross sections are dominated by a single flavor,while at mid-rapidities bothuand dflavors contribute.
Inclusive jet (orπ0) production in double-polarizedproton–proton scattering,⃗ p⃗ p→jet (or π0)+ X, is sen-sitive to the polarized gluon PDF. The first evidencefor a small, but nonzero∆g was observed by the STARCollaboration at RHIC in jet data at√s= 200 GeV, al-though recent Monte Carlo analysis [984] suggests thatthe sign of ∆g is not unambiguously determined bythese data. A summary of the kinematic coverage ofthe existing datasets used to constraint helicity PDFsis shown in Fig.10.2.2.
10.2.3 Global QCD analysisWith the growing number of high energy scattering ex-periments in the 1970s and 1980s came the need tosystematically and uniformly analyze the data with the10.2 Parton distributions 363tools that were being developed in perturbative QCD.
The concept of fitting datasets from various experi-ments globally with a single set of quark, antiquarkand gluon PDFs dates back to the early analyses ofDuke and Owens [3007] and Morfin and Tung [3008].
Since then, a number of dedicated efforts have beenmade worldwide to fit both unpolarized and polarizedscattering experiments in terms of spin-averaged andspin-dependent PDFs.
The standard paradigm has been to parametrize thePDFs at some input scaleQ0 and then evolve using theappropriate evolution equations to the scales needed forthe calculation of each experimental observable. Theparameters of the PDFs are estimated by comparingeach calculated observable with the data usingχ2 min-imization techniques. All of the global PDF analysisgroups use some variation of this approach, althoughthe details of the implementation differ between differ-ent groups.
PDF parametrizations and constraintsA typical parametrization at the input scaleQ0 for ageneric (unpolarized or polarized) PDFf isxf(x,Q20) = a0 xa1 (1 −x)a2 P(x), (10.2.9)where P(x) represents a smoothly varying function,such as a polynomial in x or √x, or more elaborateformsbased onneural networks[3009]or self-organizingmaps [3010]. Some of the parameters in the input dis-tributions can be determined from physical constraints.
For example, in the unpolarized case the conservationof valence quark number gives for the first moments∫ 10dxu−(x,Q20) = 2 ,∫ 10dxd−(x,Q20) = 1 , (10.2.10)and zero for all other flavors, while the momentum sumrule requires∫ 10dxx[ nf∑qq+(x,Q20) + g(x,Q20)]= 1, (10.2.11)where the number of flavors at the input scaleQ20 isusually taken to benf = 3.
Inthepolarizedcasethefirstmomentsofthe C-evendistributions can be related to octet baryon weak decayconstants.Fortheisovectorcombination,correspondingto the Bjorken sum rule,∫ 10dx(∆u+ −∆d+)(x,Q20) = gA, (10.2.12)where gA = 1 .270(3) is the nucleon axial charge, whilefor the SU(3) octet one has∫ 10dx(∆u+ + ∆d+ −2∆s+)(x,Q20) = a8, (10.2.13)where the octet axial chargea8 = 0 .58(3) is extractedfrom hyperonβ-decays assuming SU(3) flavor symme-try [3011]. Note that the sum rules (10.2.10)–(10.2.13)are preserved underQ2 evolution.
Power correctionsWe should note that the theoretical results summarizedabove have been obtained within the framework of per-turbative QCD in the limit when bothQ2 and W aremuch larger than all hadron mass scales, Q2,W2 ≫M2, where the cross sections are dominated by theirleading twist contributions. In actual experiments per-formed at finite beam energyE, the maximum valuesof Q2 and W are limited, which restricts the availablecoverage in Bjorken x. This is especially relevant atlarge x in DIS, where for fixedQ2, asx →1 the finalstate hadron massW decreases as one descends into theregiondominatedbynucleonresonancesat W ≲ 2 GeV.
The resonance region may be treated using the conceptof quark-hadron duality [3012], although this goes be-yond the scope of the usual perturbative QCD analysis.
Inthelow- Q2 region,powercorrectionstotheBjorkenlimit results that scale as powers ofΛ2QCD/Q2 becomeincreasingly important. In the operator product expan-sion,theseareassociatedwithmatrixelementsofhighertwist operators, associated with multi-parton correla-tions which characterize the long-range nonperturba-tive interactions between quarks and gluons. While pro-viding glimpses into the dynamics of quark confine-ment, the power corrections are viewed as unwelcomebackgrounds in efforts aimed solely at extracting lead-ing twist PDFs. Other subleading corrections are asso-ciated with target mass corrections (TMCs), which areof kinematical origin and arise from nonzero values ofhadron masses [3013–3017].
Regardless of their origin, the various power sup-pressed corrections to the leading twist results can beabsorbed into phenomenological functions, such asFi(x,Q2) = FLTi (x,Q2) + hi(x)Q2 + ..., (10.2.14)for an unpolarized structure functionFi, for example,where FLTi denotes the leading twist contribution. Thehigher twist corrections are sometimes assumed to bemultiplicative, with the functionshi proportional to theleading twist contribution. Possible additionalQ2 de-pendence of the higher twist contributions, such as fromradiative αs(Q2) corrections, is usually neglected.
Nuclear correctionsSince nucleons bound in a nucleus are not free, the par-ton distributions fi/A in a nucleus A deviate from asimple sum of PDFs in the free proton and neutron,364 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONfi/A ̸= Zfi/p + ( A−Z)fi/n, where Z is the numberof protons. This is especially relevant at small values ofx, where nuclear shadowing effects suppress the nuclearto free isoscalar nucleon (N) ratio, fi/A/(Afi/N) < 1,and at largex, where the effects of Fermi motion, nu-clear binding, and nucleon off-shellness give rise to the“nuclear EMC effect” [3018–3020]. For spin-dependentPDFs, the different polarizations of the bound nucleonsand nuclei also need to be taken into account.
In the nuclear impulse approximation, where scat-tering takes place incoherently from partons inside indi-vidual nucleons, the PDF in a nucleus can be expressedas a convolution of the PDF in a bound nucleon anda momentum distribution function fN/A of nucleonsin the nucleus [3021–3023]. The momentum distribu-tion, or “smearing function”, can be computed fromnuclear wave functions, incorporating nuclear bindingand Fermi motion effects. Coherent rescattering effectsinvolving partons in two or more nucleons give rise tonuclear shadowing corrections to the impulse approx-imation, and such effects are typically important onlyin the small-x region. In general, the relation betweenPDFs in a nucleus and in a nucleon can be written asfi/A =∑N=p,n[fN/A⊗fi/N]+ δ(oﬀ)fi/A + δ(shad)fi/A,(10.2.15)where the term δ(oﬀ)fi/A represents nucleon off-shellor relativistic corrections that account for modificationof the parton structure of the nucleon in the nuclearmedium. A similar expression can be written for spin-dependent PDFs.
At largeQ2 the smearing function has a probabilis-tic interpretation in terms of the light-cone momen-tum fractiony of the nucleus carried by the struck nu-cleon. Typically, the function fN/A is steeply peakedaround y ≈1, becoming broader with increasing massnumber A as the effects of binding and Fermi motionbecome more important. In the limit of zero binding,fN/A(y) →δ(1 −y), and one recovers the free nucleoncase. This assumption has often been made in globalPDF analyses. More recently, however, the importantrole of nuclear corrections has been more widely ap-preciated, especially in connection with extractions ofthe free neutron structure function data from measure-ments involving deuterons and other light nuclei [3023–3029].
For neutrino scattering, to increase the relativelylow rates and obtain sufficient statistics for analysessuch as strange PDF extraction [3030, 3031], experi-ments have usually resorted to using heavier nucleartargets, such as iron or lead. Extractions from such dataare complicated by the presence of nuclear correctionsin neutrino structure functions [3032, 3033], as well aseffects of the nuclear medium on the charm quark prop-agation in the final state [3034].
For spin-dependent scattering, the scarcity of dataand larger uncertainties at smallxand at highx, wherenuclear corrections are most prominent, has meant thatmost global analyses have relied exclusively on the ef-fective polarizationansatz, in which the polarized PDFin the nucleus∆fi/A is related to the polarized PDFsin the proton and neutron as ∆fi/A ≈ ⟨σ⟩p∆fi/p +⟨σ⟩n∆fi/n, where⟨σ⟩p(n) is the average polarization ofthe proton (neutron) in the nucleus. In practice, alongwith polarized protons, only polarized deuterium and3He nuclei have been used in DIS experiments. As ex-periments at high luminosity facilities such as JeffersonLab at 12 GeV push to explore the higher-xregion, nu-clear corrections from smearing and off-shell effects willbecome more relevant.
Uncertainty quantificationThere are several sources of PDF uncertainties thatenter in global QCD analyses. These include uncer-tainties on the experimental data, the approximationsused in computing the partonic cross sections, and theparametrizations used to describe the PDFs. The ex-perimental errors on the data can be directly propa-gated to the fitted PDFs. The most common methodfor implementing this is the Hessian method, describedin Ref. [3035]. The elements of the Hessian matrix aregiven by partial derivatives of theχ2 function,Hij = 12∂2χ2∂ai∂aj, (10.2.16)where ai denotes theith PDF parameter. The Hessianmatrix is generated during the minimization procedureand its inverse gives the error matrix. The eigenvectorsof the error matrix can then be used to define eigen-vector parameter sets, from which the error bands forthe PDFs or for specific processes are calculated. Animportant point to note is that the error bands gen-erally depend on a χ2 tolerance. Mathematically, theexpectation is that the1σ parameter errors correspondto an increase of χ2 by one unit from the minimumvalue, ∆χ2 = 1 . However, it has been suggested [3036]that inconsistencies between different data sets shouldbe handled by introducing a larger value to be used,∆χ2 > 1. This “χ2 tolerance” varies between groups(∆χ2 ∼10−100), and allowance must be made for thiswhen comparing the resulting error bands.
On the other hand, it has been argued [3037] thatthe tolerance criterion effectively changes the likelihoodfunction, which is usually defined in terms of theχ2function. In contrast, neural network based approaches10.2 Parton distributions 365suggest that the use of a tolerance criterion is not nec-essary [3009, 3038–3040]. In practice, the similar size ofthe uncertainties obtained in such different approachesmay be coincidental and due to the likelihood deforma-tion and resulting uncertainty inflation, as observed ina recent comparative study using toy data [3037]. Fur-thermore, concern has also been expressed [3041] thata meta-analysis, such as PDF4LHC [3042], that com-bines existing PDFs from different groups may obscurethe fundamental connection between experimental dataand theory and hide the true meaning of the uncertain-ties, if these ultimately originate from different choicesof the likelihood function.
An alternative to the usual linear propagation oferrors in the Hessian method which avoids ambiguitiesassociated with tolerance criteria, and which is usefulfor minima that are not well behaved or defined, is theMonte Carlo method. To propagate the experimentalerrors a number of replica data sets are randomly gener-atedwithintheoriginalerrors,andthesereplicasetsarethen fitted with the resulting replica PDF sets treatedusing standard statistics [3039]. The central values arecomputed as the averages over replicas, while the un-certainties are given by the envelope of predictions.
In practice, the data resampling method has beenused by the NNPDF [983, 3043] and JAM [628, 984,3029] collaborations, although these groups differ intheirapproachtoPDFparametrizatios.WhiletheJAMcollaboration uses a traditional polynomial functionalform for the functionP(x) in Eq. (10.2.9), the NNPDFgroup implements a similar basic parametric form thatis supplemented by a series of trained neural networkweights. The dependence on the functional form for thePDFcanbeminimizedbychoosingaflexibleparametriza-tion with parameters that are well-constrained by data.
Outside of kinematic regions covered by data, the PDFsare not constrained, and care must be taken when usingthem in extrapolated regions at small or largex.
The approximations made in computing partoniccrosssectionsnaturallyintroduceuncertaintiesinPDFs,although these can be rather difficult to quantify reli-ably. One of these is the uncertainty arising from thetruncation of the perturbative series. These can be esti-mated to some extent by comparing LO, NLO, NNLO,and recently even approximate N3LO [3044] fits, al-though not all processes are known to the same accu-racy. The topic of “missing higher order uncertainties”and how to estimate them has in fact attracted someattention recently in global PDF fitting efforts [3000].
Perturbative QCD calculations also depend to somedegree on the choices made for the renormalization andfactorizationscalesforeachphysicalprocess.Thechoiceswill change the results for different processes, and thefitted PDFs must compensate these changes. A closelyrelatedissue is the choiceof thestrong running couplingαs(MZ), which is fitted together with the PDF param-eters in some analyses, and fixed to the global averagein others. Finally, the choice of data sets and kinematiccuts can of course affect the extracted PDFs, and thesechoices and the reasons for them need to be assessedwhen drawing conclusions from PDF comparisons.
10.2.4 Spin-averaged PDF sUsing the technology outlined in the previous sections,a number of global QCD analyses efforts have producedsets of unpolarized proton PDFs, with groups in Europeand the the US at the forefront of the data analyses.
TheEuropeangroupsincludetheUK-basedMSHT[ 1110]group and the ABM [3045] group, which use standardglobal fitting methodology; the HERAPDF [3002] anal-ysis, which includes only data from the H1 and ZEUSexperimentsatHERA;andpreviouslytheDortmund[ 3046]group, which pioneered the approach of dynamicallygeneratingPDFsthrough Q2 evolutionfrom a lowinputscale. More recently, the NNPDF [3043] collaborationintroduced an approach based on neural networks.
US-based efforts have centered around the CTEQcollaboration, which involves two derivative analyses ofnucleon PDFs, by the CT (CTEQ-Tung et al.) [626] andCJ (CTEQ-Jefferson Lab) [3027] groups. The former fo-cuses more on LHC-related phenomenology, while thelatter has developed methodologies needed for describ-ingdataoverabroadenergyrangeincludingthelow- Q2and W domain. The Jefferson Lab-based JAM [3029,3047] collaboration uses a Monte Carlo approach withsimultaneous determination of PDFs and other typesof distributions, such as fragmentation functions andspin-dependent PDFs. In the following we illustrate thecurrent state of knowledge of the spin-averaged protonPDFs, including theuanddvalence quark distributionsand the flavor structure of the proton sea.
Valence quark distributionsValence quarks give the global properties of the nu-cleon, such as its baryon number and charge. Knowl-edge of their momentum distributions is important formany reasons, especially at high values ofx, where asingle quark carries most of the nucleon’s momentum.
The large-x region is a unique testing ground, for ex-ample, for various nonperturbative models of the nu-cleon [1092, 1341, 3024, 3048, 3049]. Reliable determi-nation of PDFs at largexis also important for searchesfor new physics beyond the Standard Model in colliderexperiments at the LHC [3041, 3050].366 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONFig. 10.2.3 Valence u and d quark PDFs versusx from sev-eral global QCD analyses: JAM21 [3029], NNPDF [627], ABMP[3045], CJ15 [3027], and CT18 [626] at a scaleQ2 = 10 GeV2.
Thevalence uanddPDFsareillustratedinFig. 10.2.3from several PDF groups. Theu quark PDF is fairlywell constrained (due to its larger charge) by the rel-atively abundant proton DIS data that have been col-lected over several decades at SLAC, CERN, DESY andJefferson Lab. Thed quark distribution, on the otherhand, relies in addition on neutron structure functions,whosedeterminationrequiresbothprotonanddeuteronDIS data. Studies of nuclear effects in the deuteron sug-gest that the uncertainties related to nucleon interac-tions increase significantly at largex [3024], leading tolarge uncertainties in thed/uPDF ratio forx≳ 0.6, asFig.10.2.4illustrates.Inclusionof taggeddeuterondatafrom the BONuS experiment at Jefferson Lab [3051,3052], and in particular the lepton andW boson asym-metry data from p¯p collisions at the Tevatron [3053–3055], reduces the uncertainty considerably in the ex-perimentally constrained region up tox∼0.8.
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9x0.00.10.20.30.40.5d/uCJ15DIS only+ BONuS+ ℓ asym (& Z rap)+ W asymFig. 10.2.4 Impact of various data sets on thed/u ratio atQ2 = 10 GeV2, using the CJ15 PDFs set [3027].
Light quark seaBecause inclusive DIS measures only C-even combina-tions of PDFs,q+, to disentangle quark from antiquarkcontributions requires other types of observables, suchas the DY cross sections, where theq and ¯q PDFs areweighted differently. As discussed in Sec.10.2.2, ratiosof pd to pp cross sections atxa ≫xb are directly sen-sitive to the ratio ¯d/¯u. The flavor asymmetry ¯d−¯uis illustrated in Fig. 10.2.5, which shows the impactof various data sets. Starting with inclusive DIS dataonly and excluding data from the NMC experiment,the asymmetry is consistent with zero within large un-certainties. Including the NMC data [3056, 3057], theasymmetry gives an indication of deviation from zeroin the range0.01 < x <0.2. When W-lepton, recon-structed W and Z boson, and jet production data fromRHIC,Tevatron,andLHCarefurtherincluded(butnotthe new STAR data [3058]), the asymmetry becomessignificantly larger, and more distinguishable from zerobelow x= 0.3.
The new constraints come primarily from the highprecision W asymmetry measurements from the Teva-tron and LHC, which are sensitive to ¯u and ¯d. Thefurther addition of the NuSea DY data [3059] greatlydecreases the uncertainty, showing that these data pro-vide a strong constraint on the asymmetry even whencompared to the Tevatron and LHCW-lepton asymme-tries. Finally, the inclusion of the new SeaQuest [3060]and STAR [3058] data reduces the uncertainty on theasymmetry even further, while increasing the magni-tude atx≳ 0.2. The behavior of the asymmetry seen inFig. 10.2.5 is consistent with expectations from nonper-turbative models of the nucleon in which the excess of¯dover ¯u in the proton sea has been that associated withchiral symmetry breaking, and the consequent preva-lence of the virtualp→nπ+ dissociation [3061–3063].
Strange quarksThe strange quark distribution has generally been moredifficulttodetermineexperimentallythanthenonstrangesea. While the size of the strange to nonstrange ra-tio Rs has been controversial, with values ranging fromRs ≈0.4 in neutrino DIS atx ≈0.02 to Rs ≈1 fromATLAS data onW/Z production [3003, 3004], an in-dependent and underutilized source of information atlower energies is semi-inclusive production of pions orkaons. Analysis of SIDIS data has often been compli-cated by the need to know both the PDFs of the ini-tial state and the fragmentation functions describinghadronization to the final state, as assumptions aboutthe latter can lead to significant differences in the ex-tracted PDFs [3064, 3065]. For any definitive conclu-sion a combined analysis of PDFs and fragmentation10.2 Parton distributions 367Fig. 10.2.5 Comparison of x( ¯d− ¯u) with different combina-tions of datasets [3047]: DIS only, excluding NMC (gold band);with NMC (gray); withW, Z, and jet production from RHIC,Tevatron, and the LHC (green); with NuSea (blue); and finallywith the SeaQuest DY and STARW-lepton ratio (red).
functions is necessary, which was first performed by theJAM group [628, 3005].
Including data from the standard datasets used forunpolarized PDFs, along with SIDIS multiplicities ande+e− annihilation data to constrain the fragmentationfunctions [3066], the most striking result of the simul-taneous JAM fit was a significantly reduced strangequark PDF compared with that reported by ATLAS, asFig. 10.2.6 illustrates. The strange to nonstrange ratiowas found to beRs ≈0.2 −0.3 at x∼0.02, in contrastto values ofRs ∼1 inferred from the ATLAS data, andcloser to those extracted from neutrino experiments.
The most significant source of the strange suppressionistheSIDIS andSIA Kproductiondata.Without thesedata, thes+ PDF is poorly constrained, in contrast tothe light flavor sea, which is not strongly affected by theSIDIS multiplicities. Consequently, while the ratioRsvaries over a large range without SIDIS (and SIA) data,and at lowxis compatible withRs ≈1, once those dataare included its spread becomes dramatically reduced.
The SIDISK± production data could also in princi-ple discriminate between thesand ¯sPDFs, which couldhave differentx dependence [3067–3072]. As shown inFig. 10.2.6, however, the current data do not indicateany significant s−¯s asymmetry within uncertainties.
Future high-precision SIDIS data from Jefferson Labor the Electron-Ion Collider may allow more stringentdeterminations of thesand ¯sPDFs [3073], as would in-clusion ofW + charm production data from the LHC[3074, 3075].
Gluons and heavy quarksGluons play an important role in the study of nucleonstructure, contributing some 50% of the nucleon’s over-all(linear)momentum,andindirectlyprovidesomecon-Fig. 10.2.6 Sum and difference of the s and ¯s PDFs fromseveral global QCD analyses, as in Fig.10.2.3.
xgQ2 = 10 GeV2JAMNNPDF3.1ABMP16CJ15CT180.01 0.1 0.5x01234Fig. 10.2.7 Unpolarized gluon PDF xg from various QCDglobal analyses at a scale ofQ2 = 10 GeV2 from several globalQCD analyses, as in Fig.10.2.3.
straints on quark PDFs through the momentum sumrule, Eq. (10.2.11). Since photons do not couple directlyto gluons, the constraints on the gluon PDFg(x) fromDIS come via theQ2 evolution of theF2 structure func-tion at low values ofx. In addition, measurements atHERA of the longitudinal structure function, which hasa leading contribution atO(αs) through theγ∗g →q¯qprocess, have allowedg(x) to be relatively well deter-mined at lowx. More directly, inclusive jet and photonproduction cross sections at hadron colliders have con-strained g(x) at moderate x values, although there issomewhat more uncertainty in the behavior at highx.
A survey of various determinations of the gluon PDF atQ2 = 10 GeV2 is illustrated in Fig.10.2.7 for the sameset of PDF parametrizations as in Fig.10.2.3.
Since that the gluon PDF is accompanied byαs inDIS structure functions, in practice there is a corre-lation between the value ofαs obtained in global PDFanalysesandtheshapeofgluondistribution,withlarger368 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONαs leading to a smallerg(x) at smallxand (via the mo-mentum sum rule correlation) a largerg(x) at largex.
An interesting question is whether αs should be fit-ted as a parameter in global analyses or, since it is aparameter of the QCD Lagrangian and should be thesame for all processes, fixed to the world average valuefor αs(MZ). Comparisons of results withαs(MZ) fittedor fixed may indicate which processes are responsiblefor any differences [3046].
ArelatedquestionistheshapeofheavyquarkPDFs,such as the charm distribution, which is known to con-tribute ∼30% of the totalF2 measured at HERA atsmall x values. Here the main production mechanismis photon-gluon fusion, so that data on inclusive charmproduction could also provide valuable constraints onthe gluon PDF in the nucleon. The question of whetherthere is a sizable nonperturbative charm componentat a low energy input scale [3076–3080] also remainscontroversial [3081–3083], with recent analyses claim-ing both positive [3084] and negative evidence [3085].
10.2.5 Spin-dependent PDF sConsiderable progress has been made in understandingthe spin structure of the nucleon since the first preci-sion polarized DIS experiments at CERN in the late1980s indicated an anomalously small fraction of theproton spin carried by quarks. A rich program of spin-dependent inclusive and semi-inclusive DIS, as well aspolarized proton-proton scattering experiments has fol-lowed,vastlyimprovingourknowledgeofspin-dependentPDFs of the nucleon over the last two decades. Whilethe spin-dependent data have not been as abundantas those available for constraining spin-averaged PDFs,severaldedicatedglobalQCDanalysesofspin-dependentPDFs to be performed. The main current global effortsincludetheDSSVgroup[ 1295,3086,3087],theNNPDFcollaboration [983, 3088], and the JAM collaboration[982, 3089], extending earlier efforts by the LSS [3064],BB [3090], KATAO [3091] and AAC [3092] groups.
Polarized valence quarksAs for the unpolarized PDFs, the spin-dependent∆u+distribution is the most strongly constrained helicityPDF, largely by the protong1 structure function data.
The corresponding∆d+ distribution, which has a neg-ative sign, is smaller in magnitude compared with∆u+and has larger relative uncertainties, especially at in-termediate and large values ofx. The size of the uncer-tainties depends somewhat on the theoretical assump-tions made for the distributions. For example, if oneassumes only the SU(2) symmetry constraint (10.2.12)for the difference∆u+ −∆d+, the uncertainties on theindividual ∆u+ and ∆d+ PDFs are significantly largerthan assuming in addition the SU(3) symmetry relation(10.2.13) involving also the strange polarization∆s+.
This is illustrated in Fig.10.2.8 for the JAM para-metrization [984], which also shows the result of a fitthat enforces in addition positivity constraints on theunpolarized PDFs. Whether spin-averaged PDFs needto be positive beyond LO inαs has been debated re-cently in the literature [3093], and generally it is under-stood that the positivity constraint should hold only atLO [3094]. The general features of the∆u+ and ∆d+PDFs in Fig.10.2.8 are similar to those found by otherglobal QCD analysis groups [983, 3087], which reflectsthe common origin in the constraints on these PDFsfrom proton and neutron DIS data. In contrast, with-out the additional assumption of SU(3) symmetry [982,3095], the strange helicity PDF remains largely uncon-strained [984, 1296].
Polarized sea quarksSince inclusive polarized DIS experiments measure C-evencombinationsofPDFs, ∆q+,additionalconstraints,either from theory or experiment, are needed to sepa-rate the individual quark and antiquark distributions.
Additionalexperimentalconstraintscomefromthesemi-inclusiveproductionofhadrons,inwhichspin-dependentPDFs are weighted by fragmentation functions, as wellas particle production in polarized hadron collisions,which involve products of spin-dependent (and spin-averaged) PDFs.
The strongest constraints on the polarization of thesea have come from recentW-lepton production datafrom polarized protons collisions at RHIC [3096–3098].
The effect of the polarizedW data is a clear nonzeroantiquark asymmetry ∆¯u−∆¯d for 0.01 ≲ x ≲ 0.3,x∆u+x∆d+0.01 0.1 0.5x−0.20.00.20.4 SU(2)SU(3)SU(3)+posFig. 10.2.8 Polarized x∆u+ and x∆d+ PDFs from the JAManalysis [984] for various scenarios: assuming SU(2) symme-try (10.2.12) (yellow bands), SU(3) symmetry (10.2.13) (bluebands), and in addition the PDF positivity constraint (redbands).10.2 Parton distributions 369Fig. 10.2.9Polarized sea quark asymmetryx(∆¯u−∆¯d) fromthe JAM [3089], NNPDF [983] and DSSV [3087] analyses.
Q2 = 10 GeV20.01 0.1 0.5x−0.4−0.20.00.20.4x∆gSU(2) SU(3) SU(3)+posFig. 10.2.10 Monte Carlo replicas for the gluon helicity PDFx∆g fitted under various theory assumptions according to theSU(2) (yellow lines), SU(3) (blue lines) and SU(3)+positivity(red lines) scenarios [984].
as Fig. 10.2.9 illustrates for the recent JAM analy-sis [3089]. Qualitatively similar, although not as pro-nounced,behaviorwasalsoobservedintheearlierDSSV[3087]andNNPDF[ 983]fits,althoughthesemadestron-ger theoretical assumptions about PDF positivity andSU(3) symmetry. The observed polarized sea asymme-try is also similar to expectations from some nonper-turbative models of the nucleon [3099–3102].
Polarized gluonsThe sign and magnitude of the gluon polarization isa critical component to understanding the decomposi-tion of the proton’s spin amongst its quark and gluonconstituents. The first clear indication of a positive∆gcame from analysis of RHIC jet production data in po-larized proton-proton collisions, which were used by theDSSV group to extract a nonzero signal for gluon mo-mentum fractions betweenx≈0.05 and≈0.2. More re-cently, the JAM collaboration [984] performed a simul-taneous global fit to unpolarized and polarized data,testing in particular the sensitivity to theoretical as-sumptions about axial charges and PDF positivity.
The results of the simultaneous analysis, illustratedin Fig. 10.2.10, show that indeed the gluon helicitycan depend strongly on the constraints imposed. In-terestingly, without restricting PDFs to be positive andassuming SU(3) flavor symmetry for the axial vectorcharges, existing polarized data allow solutions contain-ing negative gluon polarization, in addition to the stan-dard positive gluon solutions found in earlier analyses,giving equally acceptable descriptions of the data. Anegative gluon polarization would imply rather largequark or gluon orbital angular momentum contribu-tions, in order to satisfy the proton spin sum rule. Itwill be important to verify the sign and magnitude ofthe gluon polarization in future experiments [3103], aswell as explore possible insight gained from lattice QCDcalculations [3104].
10.2.6 OutlookOur knowledge of the detailed partonic structure ofthe nucleon has improved tremendously in recent years,thanks to high precision experiments and advances incomputationalanddataanalysismethods.Withplannedmeasurements at facilities such as Jefferson Lab, theLHC,andthefutureElectron-IonCollider(EIC)[ 3105],we can look forward to further breakthroughs in ad-dressing long-standing questions about the momentumand spin distributions of quarks and gluons in the nu-cleon.
Thenewexperimentswillprobehithertounexploredcorners of kinematics in which PDFs have been difficultto determine. An example is the behavior of PDFs andPDF ratios such as ∆q+/q+ in the limit as x → 1,which are particularly sensitive to the details of non-perturbative quark-gluon dynamics [3024, 3106]. Thenew data will allow one to test basic theoretical as-sumptions such as SU(2) and SU(3) symmetry, PDFpositivity, and charge symmetry in PDFs. The latter,which is expected to be broken by light quark mass dif-ferences, mu ̸= md, and by electromagnetic corrections,will need to be taken into account if one hopes for PDFaccuracy at the few-percent level. Further inroads intosolving the proton spin puzzle, through the determina-tion of the total spin contributions from quarks, anti-quarks and gluons, will require measurements of spinstructure functions down to smaller values ofx [3107,3108], which will be one of the focuses of the EIC pro-gram [3105].
The aim of few-percent precision in PDFs will alsorequire a more systematic treatment of radiative ef-fects, which in the past have been treated using approx-imate prescriptions. Recently, a combined QED+QCDapproach to factorization has been developed [3109],and while the differences with the traditional methodsare not large for inclusive processes, for more exclu-370 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONsive reactions, such as semi-inclusive DIS [3110], thesimultaneous paradigm of self-consistently incorporat-ing QED and QCD effects and determining differenttypes of distributions within the same analysis will benecessary.
Along with the new measurements, it is likely thatcomplementary information will be needed from latticeQCD simulations, especially for quantities that will bedifficult to access from experiment. Indeed, the first ex-ploratory simultaneous analyses of experimental andlattice data have already been made recently [1094,3111]. Future success in mapping out and understand-ing the quark and gluon structure of the proton willthus require a coordinated effort on the multiple frontsof experiment, theory, lattice simulation, and data anal-ysis.
10.3 Spin structureXiangdong JiThe nucleon (proton and neutron) is a spin-1/2 com-posite particle made from three valence quarks. Everymodel of the nucleon gives an explanation for its spinstructure [3112–3116], from the Skyrme model [3112],to Gell-Mann and Zweig’s quark model [3113, 3114],andtomanyothermodelspopularin70’sand80’s[ 3115,3116].Thesimplestandmostsuccessfuloneisthequarkmodel which, among others, inspired the discovery ofQCD [50], predicted that the entire nucleon spin is car-ried out by the three valence quarks [26, 2666, 3117].
The non-relativistic quark model has indeed a simpleexplanation for the nucleon spin and the associate mag-netic moments [26], also for their excited states [2666]:Three constituent quarks are all in the s-wave orbitin the nucleon, and their spins couple to1/2 in a wayconsistent with the SU(2spin ×3ﬂavor), a combined spin-flavor symmetry group [3117].
The quark-model picture for the spin was put undera test through polarized deep-inelastic scattering (DIS)on a polarized proton [3118]. The EMC collaborationmade the first definitive measurement for the fraction ofthe proton spin carried by quarks in 1987 [3119, 3120],and the result∆Σ(Q2 =10.7GeV2) = 0 .060 ±0.047 ±0.069, (10.3.1)is consistent with zero. The discrepancy has inspiredlarge amount of experimental and theoretical studieswhich have been summarized in a number of excellentreviews [3121–3125]. Perhaps the most important les-son we have learned is that the QCD quarks probed inpolarized DIS are very different from those in the con-stituent quark models, and that QCD has a much moresophisticated way to build up the proton spin.
Understanding the nucleon spin in QCD remains animportantchallengeinhadronstructurephysics,partic-ularly, in experiment. In the following, we will brieflyreview the current status and future perspective for thistopic, focusing on the questions such as: does it makesense to talk about the different parts of the protonspin? What will be an interesting decomposition for thespin? To what extent do we believe that we can measurethese parts experimentally? How can we calculate thesecontributions in fundamental theory and put them toexperimental tests?10.3.1 Spin sum rules in QCDAngular momentum (AM) or spin structure of a com-posite system can be studied through various contribu-tions to the total. In quantum field theories, the indi-vidual parts are renormalization scale and scheme de-pendent, although the total is not. The most popularconvention in the literature is to use dimensional regu-larization and modified minimal subtraction, indicatedby the dependence on the scaleµ. To understand theproton spin, we can start from QCD AM operator ex-pressed in terms of individual sources,⃗JQCD =∑α⃗Jα(µ) . (10.3.2)Through the above, one can express the total spin1/2as contributions from different parts. This has been oneof the main methods to explore the origins of the protonspin in the literature. Since the individual contributionsare the expectation values of the AM sources in theentire wave function, they are neither integers nor half-integers: they are the quantum mechanical average ofprobability amplitudes.
There exists more than one way to split the AMand derive spin sum rules for the proton. However, aphysically-interesting spin sum rule shall have the fol-lowing properties:Experimental MeasurabilityThe overwhelming interest in the proton spin beganwith the EMC data. Much of the followup experiments,including polarized RHIC [3126], Jefferson Lab 12 GeVupgrade [3127] and Electron-Ion Collider (EIC) [820,3128], have been partially motivated to search a fullunderstanding of the proton spin.10.3 Spin structure 371Frame DependenceSince spin is an intrinsic property of a particle, onenaturally searchesfor a description of its structure inde-pendent of a reference frame. How the individual contri-butions depend on the proton momentum or referenceframe requires understanding of the Lorentz transfor-mation properties of⃗Jα. Moreover, the longitudinal andtransverse spins behave differently under frame trans-formation and therefore have very different experimen-tal implications. Since the proton structure probed inhigh-energy scattering is best described in the infinitemomentum frame (IMF), a partonic picture of the spinis phenomenologically interesting to explore.
In the rest frame, the proton state|⃗P = 0,⃗ s⟩can bedefined with the angular momentum quantized along⃗ s,⃗ s·⃗J⏐⏐⏐⃗P = 0,⃗ s⟩= 1/2⏐⏐⏐⃗P = 0,⃗ s⟩, (10.3.3)where we have dropped the “QCD” subscript on ⃗J.
Boosting the above to an arbitrary Lorentz frame, onehas (ℏ = 1)(−WµSµ)|PS⟩= 1/2|PS⟩, (10.3.4)where |PS⟩have definite four-momentumPµ and spinpolarization four-vectorSµ, Sµ = (γ⃗ s·⃗β, ⃗ s+ (γ−1)⃗ s·ˆβˆβ) with SµSµ = −1, PµSµ = 0 , ˆβ the direction of⃗β = ⃗ v/c, γ = (1 −β2)−1/2 the boost factor, andWµis the relativistic spin (or Pauli-Lubanski) four-vector(ϵ0123 = 1) [3129]Wµ = −12 ϵµαλσJαλPσ/M, (10.3.5)= γ( ⃗J·⃗β, ⃗J+ ⃗K×⃗β) (10.3.6)where ⃗K is the Lorentz-boost operator defined in termsof the0 i components of the Lorentz generatorJαβ. Inthe second line of the equation, we have replaced thefour-momentum operator Pσ by its eigenvalue speci-fying a Lorentz frame⃗β. One can use Eq. (10.3.4) todevelop spin sum rules in any frame,⟨PS|(−WµSµ)|PS⟩= 1/2 , (10.3.7)by expressing the left-hand side as the sums of expecta-tion values. Thus the covariant spin is not only relatedto the AM operator but also to the boost⃗K. However,it is desirable to develop a spin picture in terms of theAM operator alone in a general Lorentz frame.
Without loss of generality, one can assume the pro-ton momentum is along thez-direction ⃗Pz = (0,0,Pz).
In the case of longitudinal polarization, one has⃗ sz =(0,0,1), −WµSµ = Jz, and Eq. (10.3.7) becomes thetotal helicity,⟨PSz|Jz|PSz⟩= 1/2 , (10.3.8)which is boost-invariant along thez-direction. This is astarting point to construct helicity sum rules. Since thehelicity is independent of momentum, the individualcontributions are generally sub-leading order in high-energy scattering.
For transverse polarization along the x-direction,⃗ sx = (1,0,0) , and Eq. (10.3.7) becomes⟨PSx|γ(Jx −βKy)|PSx⟩= 1/2 , (10.3.9)which contains the boost operatorKy from the trans-formation ofJx under the Lorentz boost alongz. Since⃗K and ⃗J transform under Lorentz tranformation as(1,0) + (0 ,1), we can deduce separate relations:⟨PSx|Jx|PSx⟩= γ/2⟨PSx|Ky|PSx⟩= γβ/2 ,true as expectation values. Therefore a transverse po-larization sum rule from the AM operator starts from⟨PSx|Jx|PSx⟩= γ/2 . (10.3.10)Because the transverse angular momentumJx dependson the longitudinal momentum of the proton, its expec-tation value grows under boost, a fact less appreciatedin the literature.
To obtain a spin sum rule, we need an expressionfor the QCD AM operator. It can be derived throughNoether’s theorem based on space-time symmetry ofthe QCD lagrangian density. Straightforward calcula-tion yields thecanonical AM expression [3130]⃗JQCD =∫d3⃗ x[ψ†f12⃗Σψf + ψ†f⃗ x×(−i⃗∂)ψf+ ⃗Ea ×⃗Aa + Eia(⃗ x×⃗∂)Aia], (10.3.11)where ψf is a quark field of flavorf,⃗Σ = diag( ⃗ σ,⃗ σ)with⃗ σthe Pauli matrices,Aia vector potentials of gaugefields with colora= 1,...8, Eia color electric fields, andthe contraction of flavor and color indices is implied.
Theaboveexpressioncontainsfourdifferentterms,eachof which has clear physical meaning in free-field theory.
The first term corresponds to the quark spin, the sec-ond to the quark orbital angular momentum (OAM),the third to the gluon spin, and the last one to the gluonOAM. Apart from the first term, the rest are not man-ifestly gauge-invariant under the general gauge trans-formation Aµ →U(x) (Aµ + (i/g)∂µ) U†(x). However,the total is invariant under the gauge transformationup to a surface term at infinity which can be ignored inphysical state matrix elements.372 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONOn the other hand, using the Belinfante improve-ment procedure (Belinfante, 1939) one can obtain agauge-invariant form [1085],⃗JQCD =∫d3x[ψ†f12⃗Σψf + ψ†f⃗ x×(−i⃗∇−g⃗A)ψf+⃗ x×( ⃗E×⃗B)], (10.3.12)All terms are manifestly gauge invariant, with the sec-ond term as mechanical or kinetic OAM, and the thirdterm gluon AM.
Helicity sum ruleUsing Eq. (10.3.8) and the gauge-invariant QCD AMin Eq.(10.3.12), one can can write down a helicity sumrule [1085],12∆Σ(µ) + Lzq(µ) + Jg(µ) = 1 /2 (10.3.13)where ∆Σ/2 is the quark helicity contribution, andLzqis quark OAM contribution. Together, they give the to-tal quark AM contribution Jq. The last term, Jg, isthe gluon contribution. Both contributions can be ob-tained from the twist-two form factors of the energy-momentum tensorTµν [1085] (see below). One impor-tant feature of the above sum rule is that it is indepen-dent of the proton’s momentum [3131]. This is an im-portant feature because the sources of the proton spindoes not depend on observer’s reference frame so longas helicity is a good quantum number.
On the other hand, the canonical form of the AMoperatorinEq.( 10.3.11)allowsderivinganinfinitenum-ber of helicity sum rules with choices of gauges and/orframes of reference [3124, 3132]. The usefulness of suchsum rules are questionable as they are not relevant toexperiment.However,thegluonspincontributionintheIMF and light-cone gaugeA+ = 0 is measurable. Jaffeand Manohar proposed a canonical spin sum rule in anucleon state withPz = ∞[3130],12∆Σ+ ∆G+ ℓq + ℓg = 12 (10.3.14)where ∆G is the gluon helicity andℓq,g are quark andgluon OAM, respectively. Considerable attention hasbeen given to the above sum rule because of its rele-vance to high-energy scattering. For example, the totalquark helicity contribution can be written in terms ofparton sum rule,∆Σ =∫ 1−1dx(∆u(x) + ∆d(x) + ....) , (10.3.15)where ∆q(x) is the quark helicity distribution function.
Moreover, ∆G has been defined and measured exper-imentally as the first moment of the gauge-invariantpolarized gluon distribution [3133]∆G(Q2) =∫ 10dx ∆g(x,Q2) ,∆g(x) = i2x(P+)2∫ dλ2πeiλx×⟨PS|F+α(0)W(0,λn) ˜F +α (λn)|PS⟩,(10.3.16)where ˜Fαβ = 12 ϵαβµνFµν, and the light-cone gauge linkW(λn,0) isdefinedintheadjointrepresentationofSU(3).
In the light-cone gaugeA+ = 0 , the nonlocal operatorin Eq. (10.3.16) reduces to the free-field form in theJaffe-Manohar sum rule. Additionally, one can write aparton sum rule for each of the OAM contributionsℓq =∫ 1−1dxℓq(x) , (10.3.17)ℓg =∫ 1−1dxℓg(x) , (10.3.18)which give a more detailed picture of AM distributionsin partons compared with the frame-independent sumrule above.
It appears that one can define a gauge-variant quan-tity which can be measured in experiment! This has in-spired much debate about the gauge symmetry proper-tiesofthegluonspinoperatorandmyriadsofexperimentally-unaccessible spin sum rules [3124]. It turns out, how-ever, that the key is not about generalizing the conceptof gauge invariance, it is about the proton state in theIMF [3134]. In particular,A+ = 0 is a physical gaugeas it leaves the transverse polarizations of the radia-tion field intact. This justifies the physical meaning of⃗E×⃗A= ⃗E⊥ ×⃗A⊥ as the gluon spin (helicity) operatorin the Jaffe-Manohar sum rule.
Comparing the two helicity sum rules Eqs. (10.3.13)and (10.3.14) above, they must be related in some wayin the IMF. In fact, their relation is [3135, 3136]Jg = ∆G+ ℓg + ℓint (10.3.19)Lq = ℓq −ℓint (10.3.20)where ℓint represents the interaction AM and does nothave a simple parton interpretation.
Transverse spin sum rulesFortransversepolarization,aspinsumruleislessstraight-forwardandmuchcontroversyexistsintheliterature[ 3124,3137]. First of all, the transversely-polarized proton is10.3 Spin structure 373not an eigenstate of the transverse AM operator. Sec-ond, the expectation value of the transverse AM has aintriguing frame dependence due to the center-of-masscontribution, which must be properly subtracted. Fi-nally, there are two contributions to the transverse AMwhich transform differently under Lorentz boost andmust combine properly to generate the total result. Thedelicate balance of two contributions entails two sepa-rate transverse spin sum rules.
The transverse spin has a simple frame-independentsum rule [3138],Jq + Jg = 1/2 , (10.3.21)whichisthesameasthehelicitysumruleduetoLorentzsymmetry. One can separate the contributions to thequark into spin and orbit ones, however, such a separa-tion is frame-dependent and therefore less interesting.
In the IMF, the above sum rule becomes partonicsum rules [3137, 3139],Jq =∫ 1−1dxJq(x) , (10.3.22)Jg =∫ 1−1dxJg(x) , (10.3.23)where Jq(x) and Jg(x) are twist-2 transverse angularmomentum densities of the quarks and gluons. Theyare related to quark and gluon unpolarized densitiesand generalized parton distributions throughJq(x) =(1/2)x(q(x)+Eq(x)) andJg(x) = (1 /2)x(g(x)+Eg(x)).
The second transverse spin sum rule can best bediscussed in the IMF, where there is a sub-leading par-tonic sum rule for the transverse spin, corresponding tothe twist-three part of the canonical angular momen-tum densityJ⊥ in Eq. (10.3.11). In a simple form, onecan write [3140]12∆ΣT + ∆GT + ℓqT + ℓgT = 12 . (10.3.24)The various terms have partonic interpretations in theIMF,∆ΣT =∫ 1−1dxgT(x) , (10.3.25)∆GT =∫ 1−1dx∆GT(x) , (10.3.26)ℓqT =∫ 1−1dxℓqT(x) , (10.3.27)ℓgT =∫ 1−1dxℓgT(x) , (10.3.28)where gT(x) = g1(x) + g2(x) and GT(x) are transversespin densities of quarks and gluons, respectively, andℓqT and ℓgT are the corresponding twist-three trans-verse OAM densities. Because of Lorentz symmetry, thevalues of these integrated quantities withT are exactlythe same as the ones withoutT in Jaffe-Manohar sumrule. However, the parton densities for the transverselypolarized proton are different from those in the longitu-dinally polarized one. For instance, for the quark spin,the difference is the well-knowng2(x) structure func-tion.
10.3.2 Lattice CalculationsAt present, the only systematic approach to solve theQCD proton structure is the lattice field theory [80],see, Sec. 4. There are less systematic approaches such asSchwinger-Dyson (Bethe-Salpeter) equations [765] andinstanton liquid models [1371] in which a certain trun-cation is needed to find a solution, see, Sec. 5. Althoughmuch progress has been made in these other directions,we focus on the lattice QCD method.
A complete physical calculation on the lattice facesa number of obstacles. First the angular momentum isflavor-singlet quantity, and as such, one needs to com-pute the disconnected diagrams for the quarks. Sinceup and down quarks are light, computational demandsat the physical pion mass are very high. Moreover, onealso has to compute gluon observables to complete thepicture, which is known to be very noisy. At the sametime, one needs to keep the lattice space sufficientlysmall and the physical volume large enough. All of theseadd up to an extremely challenging task. However, acomputation with all these issues considered has be-come possible recently, see for example Ref. [3146]. Anadditional challenge is present in computing light-conecorrelations with a real time variable. The recent devel-opment of large-momentum effective theory (LaMET)has opened the door for such computations [600, 601,609].
The matrix elements of local operators,∆Σ, Jq andJg are relatively simple to calculate using the stan-dard lattice QCD technology. Much progress has beenmade in understanding the content of manifestly gauge-invariant helicity sum rule in Eq.(10.3.13), and also thetransverse spin sum rule in Eq.(10.3.21).
The first calculations have been about the∆Σ fromdifferentquarkflavors.Alargeamountofworkhasbeensummarized in a recent review [3147]. Three most re-cent calculations are in Refs. [3141–3143], with someat the physical quark mass. Table10.3.1 is taken fromRef. [3145] and shows a summary of the recent lat-tice results on the quark helicity. The strange quarkcontribution was also calculated in Ref. [3148, 3149]through the anomalous Ward identity, and∆s+ ∆¯s=374 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEON∆u ∆d ∆s g 3A = ∆u− ∆d ∆ (u+ d)(CI) ∆(u/d)(DI) ∆ΣCyprus 0.830(26)(4) -0.386(16)(6) -0.042(10)(2) 1.216(31)(7) 0.598(24)(6) -0.077(15)(5) 0.402(34)(10)χQCD 0.846(18)(32) -0.410(16)(18) -0.035(8)(7) 1.256(16)(30) 0.580(16)(30) -0.072(12)(15) 0.401(25)(37)PNDME 0.777(25)(30) -0.438(18)(30) -0.053(8) 1.218(25)(30) 0.286(62)(72)de Florian et al.
(Q2=10 GeV2) 0.793+0.011−0.012 −0.416+0.011−0.009 −0.012+0.020−0.024 0.366+0.015−0.018NNPDFpol1.1(Q2=10 GeV2) 0.76(4) -0.41(4) -0.10(8) 0.25(10)COMPASS(Q2=3 GeV2) [0.82,0.85] [ −0.45,−0.42] [ −0.11,−0.08] 1.22(5)(10) [0.26,0.36]Table 10.3.1 Results of quark spin for theu,d and s flavors from three recent lattice calculations by the Cyprus group [3141],χQCD[3142], PNDME [3143] in theMS scheme at 2 GeV are listed.∆(u+ d)(CI) and∆(u+ d)(DI) are the spins of theuand dquarks in the connected insertion(CI) and disconnected insertion(DI). Three analyses of experiments from de Florianet al. [1295],NNPDF [983] and COMPASS [3144] are also listed for comparison. Source: Ref.[3145].
−0.0403(44)(78). The total quark spin contribution tothe proton helicity is about 40%.
To calculate the total quark orbital and gluon AMcontributions,onecanstartwiththeAMdensity, Mµνλ,of QCD, from which the AM operator is defined. Itis well-known that the AM density is related to theenergy-momentum tensor (EMT)Tµν through [3130],Mµνλ(x) = xνTµλ −xλTµν. (10.3.29)The individual contributions to the EMT, hence AMdensity, can be written as the sum of quark and gluonparts,Tµν = Tµνq + Tµνg , (10.3.30)whereTµνq = 12[¯ψγ(µi− →Dν)ψ+ ¯ψγ(µi← −Dν)ψ], (10.3.31)Tµνg = 14F2gµν −FµαFνα , (10.3.32)where Tq includes quarks of all flavor. The expectationvalues of the AM densities can be derived from the off-forward matrix elements of EMT [1085],⟨P′S|Tµνq/g(0)|PS⟩= ¯U(P′S)[Aq/g(∆2)γ(µ ¯Pν)+ Bq/g(∆2)¯P(µiσν)α∆α2M + Cq/g(∆2)∆µ∆ν −gµν∆2M+ ¯Cq/g(∆2)Mgµν]U(PS) , (10.3.33)where ¯P = ( P + P′)/2, ∆= P′ −P, andA, B, C and¯C are four independent form factors. It has been shownthatJq = 1/2(Aq(0) + Bq(0)) (10.3.34)and similarly for the gluon.
The calculation of the total quark and gluon an-gular momenta started from Ref. [3150] in which thequark part including the disconnected diagrams wascalculated without dynamical quarks. The result is thetotal quark contribution isJq = 0 .30 ±0.07, i.e. 60%;u + d + s + c + ∑q + = u, d, s, cg Total0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6Jq + , gp42.1(4.5)%10.0(3.6)%3.2(2.4)%1.8(0.9)%57.1(9.0)%37.5(9.3)%94.6(14.2)%Fig. 10.3.1 (upper) Proton spin decomposition in terms ofdifferent quark flavors and gluon from Ref. [3146]. (lower) Spindecomposition in terms of quark helicity, OAM and gluon con-tributions from Ref. [3158].
therefore about 40% of the proton spin must be carriedby the gluon. Following other quenched studies [3151,3152], dynamical simulations took over [3153–3157]. Acomplete study of the angular momentum decomposi-tion was made in Ref. [3148] in quenched formalism,and later in Ref. [3141]. It was found that the quarkorbital angular momentum contributes about 47% andgluon angular momentum contributes 28%.
A complete dynamical simulation at the physicalpionmasshasbeenfinishedrecently[ 3146].Itwasfound10.3 Spin structure 375that the total quark spin contribution is about38.2%,and the orbital angular momentum contribution of thequarks is about 18.8%, much reduced compared withquenched simulations. The total gluon contribution is37.5%. The resulting picture is shown in Fig. 1. Thetotal spin is 94.6% with an error bar of 14.2%. Thespin decomposition in terms of the total quark helicity∆Σ = ∆u+ ∆d+ ∆s, and quark OAM, and the gluonJg for nf = 2 + 1 has been calculated in Ref. [3158].
Calculation of the gluon helicity has not been pos-sible for many years because it is intrinsically a light-cone quantity. However, a progress in 2013 was madeby studying the frame dependence of non-local matrixelements. One can match the large-momentum matrixelement of a static “gluon spin” operator, which is cal-culable in lattice QCD, to∆G in the IMF [3134]. Thisidea was a prototype of LaMET, which was soon putforward as a general approach to calculate all partonphysics [600, 601]. Using LaMET, one can also calcu-late the polarized gluon helicity distribution∆g(x) in aregion ofx∼0.2−0.8. However, the approach does notallow one to calculate the integrated∆Gstarting fromspatial correlation functions of gluon field strength.
ThecomputationofpartonOAMonlatticehasbeensuggested in terms of lattice phase-space Wigner dis-tribution, in which a quark bilinear non-local operatorform factor is calculated [3159, 3160]. The non-local op-eratorcontainsaWilsonlinetomakeitgaugeinvariant.
The canonical OAM can be constructed with Wilsonlines along the main direction of the proton momentumgoing to infinity. One can in principle obtain the localgauge invariant OAM with a Wilson line connecting thetwo quark fields with a straight line. The result seemsto be consistent with the calculation discussed above.
The result in Ref. [3160] suggests that the isovectorcanonical OAM has a different sign from the mechani-cal one, and with a magnitude about 40% larger. Oneissue with this type of calculation is the renormaliza-tion, which can be done with LaMET matching.
One can also calculate the total parton OAM us-ing local operators in a fixed gauge [3161] following thesimilar approach for the gluon helicity. Matching coef-ficients between IMF and finite momentum frame havebeen calculated. One particular feature of the calcula-tion is fixed-gauge which is challenging both on latticeand QCD perturbation theory. On lattice, local gaugecondition can lead to the Gribov copies; on the otherhand, perturbation theory in a physical gauge requiresbetter understanding at large orders.
Finally, the spin structure of the nucleon in the IMFrequires calculations of various light-cone distributions,which include the quark and gluon helicity distributions∆q(x), and∆G(x), OAM distributionsJq(x) and Jg(x)Fig. 10.3.2 Angular momentum density distributions of upand down quarks in a transversely polarized proton, fitted tolattice form factors and GPDs [3162].
through GPDs, and OAM distributions ℓq(x), ℓg(x),g2(x), ∆GT(x), ℓqT(x), andℓgT(x).
Shown in Fig. 10.3.2 are twist-2 angular momen-tum densities of up and down quarks in a transversely-polarized nucleon, obtained from phenomenological fitto lattice form factors and generelized parton distribu-tions (GPDs) [3162]. They can be compared with di-rect lattice calculations and experimental data to bediscussed below.
10.3.3 Experiments and phenomenologySince the EMC experiments, there have been exten-siveexperimentaleffortsaroundtheglobetoinvestigatethe quark and gluon spin contributions to the protonspin, with two important improvements: higher preci-sion and wider kinematic coverage. Majority of theseefforts continued in line of the EMC experiment, mea-suring the polarized structure functions in inclusive DISwith polarized lepton on polarized target (proton, neu-tron, deuteron). Two important new initiatives havealso emerged. First, the DIS experiment facilities ex-tended their capabilities to measure the spin asymme-tries in the semi-inclusive hadron production in DIS(SIDIS), which can help to identify the flavor structurein the polarized quark distributions. Second, the Rela-tivistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at the BrookhavenNationalLaboratory(BNL)startedthepolarizedproton-proton experiments. This facility opened new opportu-nities to explore the proton spin, in particular, for thehelicity contributions from gluon and sea quarks (seethe previous subsection for experimental data and anal-ysis).
To take into account the constraints from all exper-iments, it is important to perform a global analysis ofthe polarized parton distributions from the world-widedata. In these analyses, one has to make some genericassumptions about the functional form (in terms of the376 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEON00.020.04AjetALLNEW FITDSSVwith ∆χ2=1 and 90% C.L. bandsSTAR 2009 run (preliminary)|η| < 0.50.5 < |η| < 1.0AjetALLpT [GeV]00.020.0410 20 30∫ dx ∆g(x)0.0010.05∫ dx ∆g(x)10.05Q2 = 10 GeV2NEW FITDSSV\*DSSV90% C.L. region90% C.L. region-0.500.51-0.2 -0.1 -0 0.1 0.2 0.3Fig. 10.3.3 (upper) Double spin asymmetry in inclusive jetproduction at RHIC and (lower) constraints on the gluon he-licity contribution to the proton spin. Source: Ref. [3086].
uJ-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 -0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1dJ-1-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.2-00.20.40.60.81HERMES Preliminaryp-DVCSJLab Hall An-DVCSGPDs from :Goeke et al., Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 47 (2001), 401.
Code VGG (Vanderhaeghen, Guichon and Guidal) 0.14± = 0.18 5.0uJ + dJAHLT GPDs [36]Lattice QCDSF (quenched) [40]Lattice QCDSF (unquenched) [41]LHPC Lattice (connected terms) [42]Fig. 10.3.4Model-dependent constraints on the up and downquark total angular momentum from DVCS measurement atJLab. Source: Ref. [3163].
unpolarized parton distributions) with a few parame-ters to fit to data, see, e.g., Refs. [983, 3086, 3144],where perturbative corrections have been included uptonext-to-leadingorder.Veryinterestingresults,inpar-ticular, for the double spin asymmetries in inclusivejet production from the RHIC experiments have pro-vided more strong constraint on the gluon spin [3164],see Fig.10.3.3. This promises great potential for futureRHIC experiments to further reduce the uncertaintiesdue to greater statistics [1278, 3165].
The total quark spin contribution to the proton spin∆Σ has been well determined from the DIS measure-ments. For this quantity, all of the global fits agree wellwith each other, which essentially givesΣq ≈0.30 withuncertainties around 0.05. However, for sea quark po-larizations including ¯u, ¯d and s (¯s), there exist greatuncertainties, in particular, for the strange quark po-larization [983, 1296, 3086], which mainly comes fromSIDIS measurements from HERMES and COMPASS.
Recently,itwasalsofoundthatthe W bosonspinasym-metries at√s= 500 GeV RHIC have also improved theconstraints on¯u and ¯d polarization [3166].
TheOAMofthequarksmaybeextractedfrommea-surement of GPD [1085],Jq = 12Σq+Lq = limt→012∫dxx[Hq(x,ξ,t ) + Eq(x,ξ,t )] ,(10.3.35)where Jq is the total quark contribution to the protonspin, H and E are GPDs. After subtracting the he-licity contribution ∆Σ from various experiments, theabove equation will provide the quark OAM contribu-tion to the proton spin. The GPDs can be measured inmany different experiments, for example, deeply virtualcompton scattering (DVCS) and hard exclusive mesonproduction. Experimental efforts have been made atvarious facilities, including HERMES at DESY, Jeffer-son Lab, and COMPASS at CERN.
In real photon exclusive production in DIS process,the DVCS amplitude interferes with the Bethe-Heitler(BH) amplitude. This will, on one hand, complicate theanalysis of the cross section, on the other hand, provideunique opportunities to direct access the DVCS ampli-tude through the interference. To obtain the constraintson the quark OAMs from these experiments, we needto find the observables which are sensitive to the GPDEs. Experiments on the DVCS from JLab 6 GeV HallA [3163] and HERMES at DESY [3167] have shownstrong sensitivity to the quark OAM in nucleon, see,e.g., Fig. 10.3.4. In these experiments, the single spinasymmetries associated with beam or target in DVCSprocesses are measured, including the beam (lepton)10.3 Spin structure 377Fig. 10.3.5 The planned electron-ion collider (EIC) at BNL, NY, USA. Highlights of the EIC impact on our understanding ofnucleon spin: total quark/gluon helicity contributions to the proton spin; sea quark helicity distribution using semi-inclusive deepinelastic scattering; nucleon tomography of the 3D gluon density in the transverse plane for different momentum fractions. (Thisfigure from Ref. [820]).
single spin asymmetry and (target) nucleon single spin(transverse or longitudinal) asymmetries.
Alessmodel-dependentapproachtoextracttheAMinformation from DVCS or similar experiments is toperform a global analysis. Several theory groups havebeenworkingonglobalanalysisoftheDVCSandDVEMprocesses [3168–3170]. Recently, a framework to makegeneralanalysisofGPDssimilartoCTEQprogram[ 1086],calledGPDsthroughuniversalmomentumparametriza-tion (GUMP) [3162], has been proposed based on theprevious work on conformal moments expansion [3171,3172].Theframework,onceincludingthe ξdependence,can be used to fit experimental cross sections and asym-metries. In this way, the quark AM extracted will haveless systematic error. In addition, this approach allowsus to get the twist-2 quark AM densities,Jq(x), withconstraints from experimental data. A number of im-portant AM densities in the spin sum rules dependon information from twist-3 GPDs, such as canonicalOAM densities in both longitudinally and transverselypolarized proton. Extracting the relevant GPDs fromexperimental data will be very challenging due to thekinematic suppression.
For the gluon GPDs and AM density Jg(x), oneof the most interesting processes is heavy quarkoniumproduction in hard exclusive DIS. This is in particularimportant at the EIC machine. In early 2020, DOE an-nounced that the next major facility for nuclear physicsin US will be a high-energy high-luminosity polarizedEIC to be built at BNL. The primary goal of the EICis to precisely image gluon distributions in nucleonsand nuclei, revealing the origin of the nucleon spin andexploring the new QCD frontier of cold nuclear mat-ter [820, 3128].
The EIC will impact our understanding of nucleonspin in many different ways. In the following, we high-light some of these impacts. First, the quark and gluonhelicity contributions to the proton spin is the majoremphasis of the planned facility. With the unique cov-erageinboth xandQ2,theEICwouldprovidethemostpowerful constraints on∆Σ and ∆G[820]. Also shownin Fig. (10.3.5) are the projected uncertainty reductionswith the proposed EIC machine. Clearly, the EIC willmake a huge impact on our knowledge of these quan-tities, unmatched by any other existing or anticipatedfacility.
Second, the sea quark polarization will be very pre-cisely determined through SIDIS. With much largeQ2and x coverage, SIDIS at EIC will provide unprece-dented kinematic reach and improve the systematic un-certainties. In Fig.10.3.5, we show the example of seaquark polarization constraints from the EIC pseudo-data simulations.
Third, there will be a comprehensive program onresearch of GPDs at the EIC. As discussed above, theGPDsprovidefirsthandconstraintsonthetotalquark/gluonangular momentum contributions to the proton spin.
Moreover, they also provide important information onthe nucleon tomography, especially, the 3D imaging ofpartons inside the proton. With wide kinematic cov-378 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONerage at the EIC, a particular example was shown inFig. 10.3.5 that the transverse imaging of the gluon canbepreciselymappedoutfromthedetailedmeasurementof hard exclusiveJ/ψ production in DIS processes.
Finally, we would like to emphasize theoretical ef-forts are as important as the experiments to answerthe nucleon spin puzzle. An important question con-cerns the asymptotic small-xbehavior for the spin sumrule. There have been some progresses to understandthe proton spin structure at small-x from the associ-atedsmall-xevolutionequations[ 3173–3181].Morethe-oretical efforts are needed to resolve the controversialissues raised in these derivations. The final answer tothese questions will provide important guidance for thefuture EIC, where proton spin rum rule is one of themajor focuses.
Foradditionaldiscussionoftheseissues,seeSec. 10.2.
10.4 Nucleon Tomography: GPDs, TMDsand Wigner DistributionsAndreas Schafer and F eng Y uanExploring the nucleon is of fundamental importance inscience, starting from Rutherford’s pioneering experi-ment one hundred years ago where he investigated theinternal structure of atomic matter [3182]. Followingthis effort, the scientific developments in the last cen-tury have revealed the most fundamental structure ofthe matter in our universe: the nucleus is made of nu-cleons (protons and neutrons) and the nucleon is madeof partons: quarks and gluons. In particular, inclusiveDIS experiments probe the parton distribution func-tions which describe the momentum distributions of thepartons inside the nucleon, see, Sec. 10.2.
On the other hand, the inclusive measurements ofthe above processes only probe one dimension of thepartondistributions,wherethePDFrepresentstheprob-ability distribution of a particular parton (quark orgluon) with a certain fractionxof the nucleon momen-tum in the infinite momentum frame. In recent years,the hadron physics community is pursuing an exten-sion of this picture to include the transverse direction.
The goal is to obtain a three-dimensional tomographyof parton densities inside the nucleon. In some sense,these efforts continue the original Rutherford experi-ment to map out the internal structure of a nucleon inthree dimensions.
The nucleon is assumed to move in theˆz-direction.
Its structure in transverse direction can be either anal-ysed in coordinate space using generalized parton dis-tributions (GPDs) [1085, 1288, 3183–3188], or in mo-mentum space using transverse momentum dependentparton distributions (TMDs) [1274, 1286, 3189, 3190].
In Refs. [972, 3191] introduce the impact parameter de-pendent parton distributions, which are Fourier trans-forms of GPDs in certain kinematics and which are thedesired parton densities in coordinate space.
The information parametrized by GPDs and TMDsis contained in “mother distributions”, the so-calledWigner distributions [3192, 3193]. Wigner distributionswere introduced by Wigner in 1930s as phase space dis-tributions in quantum mechanics,W(r,p) =∫dηeipηψ∗(r−η2)ψ(r+ η2) , (10.4.1)where r and p represent the coordinate and momen-tum space variables, respectively, and ψ is the wavefunction. When integrating overr(p), one gets the mo-mentum (probability) density from the wave function,which is positive definite. For arbitraryr and p, theWigner distribution is not positive definite and doesnot have a probability interpretation. This reflects thefact that the Wigner distribution contains all quantummechanical information contained inψ, which goes be-yond probabilities.
Following this concept, we can define the Wignerdistribution for a quark in a nucleon with momentumP [3192, 3193],WΓ(x,k⊥,⃗ r) =∫ dη−d2η⊥(2π)3 eik·η⟨P|Ψ(⃗ r−η2)ΓΨ(⃗ r+η2)|P⟩,(10.4.2)wherexrepresents the longitudinal momentum fractioncarried by the quark,k⊥ is the transverse momentum,⃗ rthe coordinate space variable, andΓ the Dirac ma-trix to project out a particular quark distribution. Thequarkfield Ψ containstherelevantgaugelinktoguaran-tee gauge invariance of the above definition [3192]; seemore discussions below. We can also define the Wignerdistribution for gluons accordingly.
If we integrate the Wigner distribution overrz, weobtain the transverse Wigner distribution,WTΓ (x,k⊥,r⊥)=∫ drzdη−d2η⊥(2π)3 eik·η⟨P|Ψ(⃗ r−η2)ΓΨ(⃗ r+ η2)|P⟩,=∫ d2q⊥dη−d2η⊥(2π)5 eiq⊥·r⊥eik·η×⟨P + q⊥2 |Ψ(−η2)ΓΨ(η2)|P −q⊥2 ⟩,where we have introduced a wave package for the nu-cleon state to derive the last equation. The Wigner dis-tribution functions are also referred to as generalized10.4 Nucleon Tomography: GPDs, TMDs and Wigner Distributions 379Fig. 10.4.1 Transverse momentum dependent parton distributions and the generalized parton distributions are unified in theWigner distributions. This plot is adopted from Ref. [ 820].
TMDs (GTMDs) [3194, 3195]. They can be interpretedas phase space (r⊥,k⊥) distributions of a parton in thetransverse plane perpendicular to the nucleon momen-tum direction.
TheWignerdistributionfunctionsreducetotheTMDsand GPDs upon integration over certain kinematic vari-ables. For example, when integrated overr⊥, the abovedistribution leads to the transverse momentum depen-dent quark distributions,f(x,k⊥) =∫ dη−d2η⊥(2π)3 eik·η⟨P|Ψ(−η2)ΓΨ(η2)|P⟩.
(10.4.3)On the other hand, if we integrate outk⊥, we obtain theimpact parameter dependent quark distribution [972],which is the Fourier transform of the GPDs atξ= 0,f(x,b⊥) =∫ d2∆⊥(2π)2 ei∆⊥·b⊥∫ dη−2π eik·η×⟨P + ∆⊥2 |Ψ(−η−2 )ΓΨ(η−2 )|P −∆⊥2 ⟩=∫ d2∆⊥(2π)2 ei∆⊥·b⊥H(x,ξ,t )|ξ=0 . (10.4.4)Here, t = −⃗∆2⊥ and H(x,ξ,t ) represents one of theGPDs (definitions will be given below).
The relations between these different functions isoften illustrated by the cartoon in Fig. 10.4.1 whichis, however, somewhat symbolic. Just like the Wignerdistribution in quantum mechanics contains the full in-formation of the wave functionψ, a Wigner functionin quantum field theory (QFT) contains the full com-plexity of QFT, including its dependence on the chosenrenormalization and factorization scheme. For exampleTMDs depend on the two scaling variablesµ and ζ,while PDFs depend only onµ. Consequently equationslikef(x)?!=∫d2k⊥f(x,k⊥) (10.4.5)areonlyvaliduptoschemedependentsubtraction/renormal-ization factors or even matching functions. This has sig-nificant consequences. For example, usually, the lhs ofEq.(10.4.5) fulfills a different evolution equation thanthe rhs. Thus, when comparing the results of differentphenomenological TMD fits or lattice calculations onehas to convert them into the same scheme.
For other functions there is no such complication.
For example, thex integral of GPDs is equal to formfactors, e.g.,F1(Q2) =∫dxH(x,ξ,t = −Q2). This be-ing said, such complications as well as theµ and ζ de-pendence are usually suppressed to simplify notationand we do the same in this review.
The status and perspective of both the collinearPDFs and nucleon form factors have been well coveredin this review, see, Sec. 10.1 and Sec. 10.2.
The tomographical information inherent to Wignerdistributionsisbestillustratedbytheresultingintuitiveand rigorous method to define the quark/gluon orbitalangular momentum (OAM). This follows the concept ofthe Wigner distribution as a phase-space distribution,i.e., to compute the physical observable, one takes theaverage over the phase-space as if it were a classicaldistribution,⟨ˆO(r,p)⟩=∫drdpW(r,p)O(r,p) . (10.4.6)380 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONSincetheorbitalangularmomentumrepresentsthequan-tity ⃗ r×⃗ p, we obtain the quark/gluon OAM from theintegralof ⃗ r×⃗ pmultipliedwiththeWignerdistribution.
ForthepartonWignerdistribution,onefirstrealizesthat a gauge invariant parton distribution must includea gauge link extending from the location of the partonto infinity. An optimal choice for high-energy collisionsis a gauge link along the relevant light-cone directionnµ,ΨLC(ξ) = P[exp(−ig∫ ±∞0dλn ·A(λn+ ξ))]ψ(ξ) .
(10.4.7)where P indicates path ordering. The above definedgauge link can go to+∞or −∞; see more discussionsbelow. In practical applications, we can also choose astraight-line gauge link along the direction of the space-time positionξµ,ΨFS(ξ) = P[exp(−ig∫ ∞0dλξ ·A(λξ))]ψ(ξ) .
(10.4.8)This link reduces to unity in Fock-Schwinger gauge,ξ·A(ξ) = 0 . With the above definitions, we can writedown the quark Wigner distribution as,WP(k+ = xP+,⃗b⊥,⃗k⊥) (10.4.9)= 12∫ d2⃗ q⊥(2π)3∫ dk−(2π)3 e−i⃗ q⊥·⃗b⊥⟨⃗ q⊥2⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ˆWP(0,k)⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐−⃗ q⊥2⟩,with the Wigner operator,ˆWP(⃗ r,k) =∫ΨP(⃗ r−ξ/2)γ+ΨP(⃗ r+ ξ/2)eik·ξd4ξ ,(10.4.10)where Pdenotes the path and is eitherLC or FS, ⃗ risthe quark phase-space position, andk the phase-spacefour-momentum.
It can be shown that the total OAM is given by theparton’s Wigner distribution,Lq = ⟨PS|∫d3⃗ rψ(⃗ r)γ+(⃗ r⊥ ×i⃗D⊥)ψ(⃗ r)|PS⟩⟨PS|PS⟩=∫(⃗b⊥ ×⃗k⊥)WFS(x,⃗b⊥,⃗k⊥)dxd2⃗b⊥d2⃗k⊥ ,(10.4.11)which provides a gauge-invariant expression for the par-ton’s OAM [3138, 3197].
Similarly, the canonical OAM in light-cone gaugefulfills the simple but gauge-dependent parton sum rulein the quantum phase space [3195, 3196, 3198],ℓq = ⟨PS|∫d3⃗ rψ(⃗ r)γ+(⃗ r⊥ ×i⃗∂⊥)ψ(⃗ r)|PS⟩⟨PS|PS⟩=∫(⃗b⊥ ×⃗k⊥)WLC(x,⃗b⊥,⃗k⊥)dxd2⃗b⊥d2⃗k⊥ .(10.4.12)/Minus0.6 /Minus0.4 /Minus0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6/Minus0.6/Minus0.4/Minus0.20.00.20.40.6bx/Slash1fmby/Slash1fmTotal lzu00.17Fig. 10.4.2 Distributions in impact parameter space of themean transverse momentum of an unpolarized u-quark in alongitudinally polarized nucleon, taken from Ref. [3196]. Thenucleon is polarized perpendicular to the plane, while the ar-rows show the size and direction of the mean transverse mo-mentum of the quarks. This gives an intuitive picture of thequark orbital angular motion inside the nucleon.
The above two OAMs,Lq and ℓq, correspond to thequark OAMs in the Ji and Jaffe-Manohar spin sumrules, respectively, discussed in Sec. 10.3. Similar con-clusions hold for the gluon OAMs as well.
Therefore, the Wigner distribution, to some extend,contains the parton OAMs in two different spin sumrules. This further illustrates that the difference be-tween them comes from the gauge link direction. A re-cent lattice QCD calculation has shown that the quarkOAMs can be obtained from the quark Wigner distri-butions and the difference betweenLq and ℓq has beendemonstrated [3159, 3160].
In the last years a number of studies have directlyprobedthequark/gluonOAMcontributions[ 3199–3203]applyingtheWignerdistributionforhardexclusivepro-cesses. For example, the single longitudinal target-spinasymmetriesinhardexclusivedijetproductioninlepton-nucleoncollisions[ 3199,3200]andthedoublespinasym-metries in this process [3203] can provide crucial infor-mation on the gluon’s canonical OAM contribution.
The determination of Wigner distributions is thusan important challenge for future studies; see discus-sions in the end of this subsection. The crucial pointis that there exists a well-defined, standardized way tolink nucleon tomography to Wigner distributions con-structed from light-cone wave functions [3196]. As anexample we show in Fig.10.4.2 the average transversemomentumflowinimpactparameterspacefor u-quarksinside the proton. While this result is model dependent,it has the great advantage of providing an intuitive im-10.4 Nucleon Tomography: GPDs, TMDs and Wigner Distributions 381-101b/LBracket1fm/RBracket1-5-4-3-2-1log/LParen1x/RParen100.0250.050.0750.1x H/LParen1x,b/RParen1-101b/LBracket1fm/RBracket1Fig. 10.4.3Transverse profiles for the up quark distribution intransverse coordinate space as function of x.
age of the quark orbital motion distribution inside ahadron.
Generalized Parton DistributionsThe GPDs are one of the projections from the Wignerdistributions. They are extensions of the usual collinearparton distributions discussed in Sec. 10.2 and definedas off-forward matrix elements of the hadron. For ex-ample, for the quark GPDs, we have [1083, 1085, 1288,3184–3187]∫ dλ2πeiλx⟨P′S′|Ψq(−λ2 n)̸nΨq(λ2 n)|PS⟩(10.4.13)= U(P′)[Hq(x,ξ,t )̸n+ Eq(x,ξ,t )σαβnα∆β2Mp]U(P) ,where ∆ = P′ −P with t = ∆2, x is the light-conemomentum fraction of the quark, and the skewness pa-rameterξisdefinedas ξ= (P−P′)·n/(P+P′)·n.Intheforward limit, we haveξ = 0 and t= 0 , and the GPDsreduce to the usual collinear PDFs. Thex-moments ofGPDs lead to not only the electromagnetic form fac-tors but also the gravitational form factors [1085], oneof which produces the spin sum rule as discussed in theprevious subsection.
Depending on the polarization of the quark andthe nucleon states, the leading-twist quark GPDs con-tain eight independent distributions. The GPDs can bemeasured in many different experiments, for example,DVCS and hard exclusive meson production. Experi-mental efforts have been made at various facilities, in-cluding HERMES at DESY, Jefferson Lab, and COM-PASS at CERN. It will be a major focus of the futureEIC as well.
Nucleon tomography in terms of the GPDs is bestillustrated in the impact parameter dependent partondistirbution of Eq. (10.4.4). From that, we can definethe transverse quark density profile [3191]:ρq(x,b) =∫ d2∆(2π)2 e−i∆·bHq(x,−∆2) . (10.4.14)An important feature of the above distribution is howit changes with longitudinal momentum fractionx. InFig. 10.4.3, we show the transverse density profile fortheupquarkfromtheGPDparameterizationsof[ 3168].
The plot shows that the transverse profile in coordinatespace becomes wider at smaller x. At large x, how-ever, it approaches a point-like structure, which meansthere is no t dependence of the GPD quark distribu-tion, a result consistent with large-x power countingfor GPDs [3204]. One of the primary goals of the GPDprogram at the JLab-12GeV and the EIC is to map outthe x-dependence of the GPDs and the tomographicimages for both quarks and gluons.
Most interestingly, when the nucleon is transverselypolarized,thepartondistributioninthetransverseplanewill be asymmetric due to the contribution from theGPD E [3191],ρXq (x,b)=∫ d2∆(2π)2 e−i∆·b(Hq(x,−∆2) + i∆Y2M Eq(x,−∆2))= Hq(x,b) − 12M∂∂bY Eq(x,b) , (10.4.15)whereHq(x,b) andEq(x,b) arethe2-dimensionalFouriertransformationsof Hq(x,−∆2) andEq(x,−∆2),respec-tively, and the nucleon is polarized in theX direction.
This asymmetric distribution has attracted strong in-terest in the hadron physics community and it was ar-gued that it might be related to the single spin asym-metry phenomena in hadronic processes [3191]. It hasalso been found in a lattice simulation [3205].
In order to factor out the transverse displacementfrom the nucleon’s center of momentum and its contri-bution to the transverse polarization, one can introducean intrinsic quark density [3140],ρXq,In(x,b) =∫ d2∆(2π)2 e−i∆·b [Hq(x,−∆2)+ i∆Y2M(Hq(x,−∆2) + Eq(x,−∆2))]= Hq(x,b) − 12M∂∂bY (Hq(x,b) + Eq(x,b)) ,(10.4.16)from which one can reproduce the transverse polariza-tion sum rule; see Sec. 10.3. In Fig.10.4.4, we showthe intrinsic transverse density foru and d quarks atx = 0 .3 from the analysis of the GPD quark distribu-tion of [3162]. Clearly, the quarks have non-zero trans-verse displacement, which contributes to the transverseangular momentum of the nucleon.382 10 STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEONFig. 10.4.4 Plots of the intrinsic quark densities ρXq,In(x,b)for both u and d quarks in a transversely polarized proton (inthe X direction) at x= 0 .3. Both the u and d quark densitiesare shifted in the Y direction and contribute to the angularmomentum JX. While the u contributions are positive ( +Ydirection) and the d contributions are negative ( −Y direction).
These plots are adopted from Ref. [ 3162].
The theoretical framework has been well developedfor the GPD studies with established QCD factoriza-tion for the associated exclusive processes [1290–1292].
Higher order perturbative QCD corrections have beencalculated in a number of publications [1292, 3206–3214]. The first computation of next-to-next-leading or-der corrections for DVCS has also been reported re-cently [3215]. However, since GPDs depend on threevariables (x,ξ,t) in addition to the scale variableµ, itis much more difficult to extract them from experimentthan PDFs (which only depend onx).
Pioneering phenomenological work has been carriedout in Refs. [1288, 3168, 3172, 3211, 3216, 3217]. Inthe last years, progress has also been made toward aglobal analysis of GPDs from a wide range of exper-iments [3162, 3218–3224]. Especially, the twist-2 andtwist-3 results were re-derived with an optimal lightconecoordinateandfullkinematicsadopted[ 3222–3224].
A dedicated program based on earlier developments ofRef. [3216] has been proposed in Ref. [3162]. All thesetheory advances are crucial for a successful campaign todetermin GPDs from DVCS and other hard exclusiveprocesses measured at JLab-12 GeV and the plannedElectron-Ion Collider.
Lattice QCD can be used to study these GPDs aswell. Employing the LaMET formalism, exciting re-sults on thex-dependence of the GPD quark distribu-tions have already been obtained [634,3225]. We expectmany more such simulations to emerge in the future, aswell as combined fits to experimental and lattice data.
Transverse Momentum Dependent Parton DistributionsTheoretical studies of TMDs started long ago (see, forexample, Ref.[1274]). In recent years great progress wasmade in the exploration of these distribution functionsand the associated single spin asymmetry phenomena.
In particular, TMDs provide not only an intuitive illus-tration of nucleon tomography, as we discussed above,but also the important opportunities to investigate thespecific nontrivial QCD dynamics associated with theirphysics: QCD factorization, universality of the partondistributionsandfragmentationfunctions,andtheirscaleevolutions.
DifferentfromthecollinearPDFsdiscussedinSec.10.2,the TMD parton distributions can not be studied in in-clusive processes. We have to go beyond that and ex-plore semi-inclusive hard processes, where a hard mo-mentum scale is involved in addition to the transversemomentum of the final-state particle produced. For ex-ample, we can study the TMD quark distributions insemi-inclusive DIS (SIDIS), where the virtual photon(with virtuality Q) scatters off the hadron and pro-duces a final state hadron in the current fragmentationregion. The hadron’s transverse momentumPh⊥ has tobe much smaller than the hard momentumQ. Becauseof Ph⊥ ≪Q, this process can be factorized into theTMD quark distribution convluted with the TMD frag-mentation function. Similarly, the Drell-Yan lepton pairproduction (orW/Z-boson, Higgs boson production) inhadronic collisions can be described by the convolutionof two TMD parton distributions with transverse mo-mentum q⊥ ≪Q. A related process ine+e− annihila-tion into two back-to-back hadrons can be factorized asa convolution of two TMD fragmentation functions.
The TMD quark distributions can be defined by thefollowing matrix [1274, 1286, 1298, 1311, 3189, 3190],ˆMαβ(x,k⊥) =∫ dy−d2y⊥(2π)3 e−ixP+·y−+i⃗k⊥·⃗ y⊥×⟨PS|Ψβ(y−,y⊥)Ψα(0)|PS⟩, (10.4.17)where xis the longitudinal momentum fraction andk⊥the transverse momentum carried by the quark. Thequark field Ψ(y) contains a gauge link as defined inEq. (10.4.7). This definition contains a light-cone sin-gularity from higher order corrections. The regulationand subtraction procedure defines the scheme of theTMD distributions. Obviously, in the theoretical limitin which contributions from all orders and all twistsare taken into account observable, physical quantitieshave to be scheme independent. (At the most simplelevel this was actually shown explicitly in Ref. [3226]but it has to be true also non-perturbatively.) Often,however (e.g. in event generators), rather specific mod-els are used for which this is not the case. In thesecases the fitted TMDs and thus the result of hadrontomography can be strongly scheme/model dependent(see e.g. Ref. [3227]). Calculating the model-specificmatching factors or functions between such a scheme10.4 Nucleon Tomography: GPDs, TMDs and Wigner Distributions 383Fig. 10.4.5 The leading order transverse momentum depen-dent quark distributions depend on the polarization of thequark (rows) and the nucleon (columns).
12340123Fig. 10.4.6 The quark Sivers function represents the asym-metric distribution of a quark in transverse momentum spacewhen the nucleon is polarized along theˆy-direction. This plotis adopted from a phenomenological study [3228].
and the usual TMD factorization scheme is often notpossible. This should flag a warning that one has tobe careful when comparing fitted TMDs from differentsources. The leading order expansion of the above ma-trix contains eight independent quark TMDs, depend-ing on the polarization of the quark (varying horizon-tally)andthenucleon(varyingvertically)inFig. 10.4.5.
The gauge link direction plays an essential role in thenaive time-reversal-odd TMD quark distributions, in-cluding the quark Sivers functionf⊥1T(x,k⊥) and Boer-Mulders functionh⊥1 (x,k⊥).
The spin-average quark distributions are symmetricin the transverse plane. However, if the nucleon (or thequark) is transversely polarized, the quark distributionshows an azimuthal asymmetry. In particular, the TMDquark Sivers functions quantify these asymmetries inthetransversemomentumspace.InFig. 10.4.6,weshowone of the resulting distributions for the quark (aver-aged overx) in transverse momentum space in a trans-versely polarized nucleon. The TMD distribution comesfrom the fit to the associated single transverse spinasymmetries in semi-inclusive hard processes [3228].
For the quark Sivers function, because of the ini-tial/final state interaction (represented by the gaugelink pointing to −∞ or +∞ in the quark distribu-tion definition) difference, they differ by signs for semi-inclusive hadron production in DIS (SIDIS) and Drell-Yan processes [1297, 1298, 1310, 1311, 3229, 3230]. Thisleads to a sign change between the SSAs in SIDIS andDrell-Yan processes,Sivers SSA |DY = −Sivers SSA |DIS . (10.4.18)This nontrivial result still holds when gluon radiationcontributions are taken into account [1321, 3231–3233].
It is very important to test this nontrivial QCD predic-tion by comparing the SSAs in these two processes. TheSivers single spin asymmetries in SIDIS processes havebeen observed by the HERMES [3234, 3235], COM-PASS [3236–3239], and JLab [3240, 3241] collabora-tions. There have been significant efforts to measurethe Sivers asymmetries in Drell-Yan process at COM-PASS[3242]andthatof W± productionatRHIC[ 3243].
The analyses of these data provide an indication for asign change [3244], but no proof. More precise measure-ments are needed to confirm this crucial property.
In TMD factorization for semi-inclusive hard pro-cesses [1269, 1274, 1282, 1285, 1871], collinear and softgluon radiations are factorized into the TMD partondistributions or fragmenation functions and the asso-ciated soft factors. As for the integrated parton dis-tribution functions, these gluon radiation contributionscan be resummed to all orders by solving the relevantevolution equations. This resummation is referred to asTMD or Collins–Soper–Sterman resummation [1282].
As a result, the factorization simplifies the differen-tial cross section to a convolution of soft factor–sub-tracted TMD distributions and/or fragmentation func-tions [1269], where the hard momentum scale is cho-sen as factorization scaleµF = Q. As an example, inFig. 10.4.7, we show the TMD up quark distributionf(sub)(x= 0 .1,kT,µF = Q) as a function of the trans-verse momentum at different scales. Clearly, the resum-mation/scale evolution leads to broadening effects forTMD distributions at higher scales. Based on these de-velopments, recent global analyses have achieved highprecision for the unpolarized TMD quark distributionand fragmentation functions fitted to data from varioussemi-inclusive hard processes [3245–3248]. Of course,further theoretical developments are still needed to an-swer crucial questions concerning TMD factorization atlowerscaleSIDISandthequestionhownon-perturbativeeffectsaffectthematchingbetweentheTMDsandcollinearPDFs [3248–3251]. Upcoming data from the JLab-12GeV program should significantly improve our under-standing of these issues in the near future.
In addition, progress has been made in studyingthe scale evolution for the quark Sivers function andthe associated quark-gluon-quark correlation functions[1318, 1319, 3252–3256], and the QCD resummation