384 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYQ2=2.4 GeV2Q2=10 GeV2Q2=90 GeV20 2 4 6 80.010.11.
kT HGeVLfuHsubLHx, kT LFig. 10.4.7TMD up-quark distributionsf(sub.)u (x= 0 .1,k⊥)as functions of the transverse momentumk⊥ (GeV) at threedifferent scalesQ2 = 2 .4, 10, 90 (GeV2). This plot is adoptedfrom Ref. [3226].
for the SSA observables [3256–3260]. These resumma-tion effects have been taken into account in a recentphenomenological study of all single spin asymmetriesassociated with the quark Sivers function in a globalanalysis using (N3LO) evolution for the TMDs [3228,3244].
There has also been significant progresses towardlattice calculations of TMDs [635, 638, 639, 3261–3272]inthelastfewyears,partiallyagainbasedontheLaMETformalism. The TMD evolution kernel was calculatedfrom lattice QCD [635, 637, 639, 3269, 3270] for pertur-bative and non-perturbative [3247, 3248, 3273] impactparameters band the result agreed with that of a fit toexperimental data [3227]. This motivates great hopesfor future combined TMD fits to experimental and lat-tice data. We also expect lattice simulation of the sin-gle spin asymmetries associated with the quark Siversfunction, using the perturbative matching derived inRef. [3265].
More recently, important developments have takenplace addressing the connections between the TMD for-malism and small-x saturation physics. Small-x gluonsaturationisbestdescribedinthecolor-glass-condensate(CGC)/color-dipole formalism [3274–3278], for whichthe so-called unintegrated gluon distributions (UGDs)are essential elements. What has been shown in therecent papers [3279–3285] is that these UGDs are thesameastheTMDgluondistributionfunctionsatsmall- x.
Meanwhile, considerable progress has also been made incomputing Sudakov double logarithms in the small-xformalism [3286–3291]. These computations provide asolid theoretical foundation for further rigorous inves-tigations that probe the dynamics of the saturationregime with hard processes. We anticipate that in theforeseeable future a unified picture of nucleon structurewill emerge that covers the whole kinematic domain,including small and largex.
Direct access to the Wigner distributionsIt was generally believed that the parton Wigner dis-tributions are not directly measurable in high energyscattering. However, it was realized recently that theWigner distribution could be measured through hardexclusive processes [3292–3294]. In particular, it wasshown in Ref. [3292] that the small-xgluon Wigner dis-tribution is connected to the color dipole S-matrix inthe CGC formalism [3274–3278], that diffractive dijetproduction in ep/eA collisions [3292, 3295–3299] mayprovide a direct probe of this gluon Wigner distribu-tion. Additionally, semi-hard gluon radiation in thisprocess or ‘trijet’ diffractive production has been shownto probe the color-dipole amplitude in the adjoint rep-resentation [3300, 3301]. This demonstrates that a newclass of diffractive processes, including semi-inclusivediffractive DIS [3302] can provide crucial informationon the gluon Wigner distributions at small-x. Extentionto other processes, in particular, those at moderate andlarge x will be interesting to follow as well. We expectmore research along this direction in the future.
To summarize this subsection: There has been greatprogress in both experiment and theory for GPD andTMD physics. Of course, challenges are still there inboth fields. We would like to emphasize that data fromfuture experiments, including the 12 GeV upgrade ofJLab, COMPASS and the planed EIC experiments, to-gether with theory developments, will lead us to a com-plete 3D tomography of the nucleon.
11 QCD at high energyConveners:Gudrun Heinrich and Eberhard KlemptThe core of high energy collisions consists in a hardscattering of two partons, where the momentum trans-fer is very large and therefore the process can be calcu-lated perturbatively. The enormous progress in the cal-culationofQCDcorrectionsbeyondtheleadingorderinperturbation theory is described by Gudrun Heinrich.
The scattered partons can emit soft or nearly collineargluons. In kinematic regions where the phase space forsuchemissionsisrestricted,largelogarithmsarise,whichcan spoil the perturbative convergence. Due to the uni-versal structure of infrared divergent QCD radiation,such logarithms can be resummed analytically to allorders to restore the predictive power of the perturba-tive description in these kinematic regions, as describedby Simone Marzani.
At the intermediate stage between the hard inter-action and hadronization, the radiation of gluons from11.1 Higher-order perturbative calculations 385quarksandthesplittingofgluonsintosecondaryquarksand gluons, forming a cascade of emissions, can be de-scribed by parton showers. The development of theseparton showers and our understanding of these pro-cesses are described by Frank Krauss.
Once these showers of partons have evolved to lowenergies, the process of hadron formation sets in. Atthese energies, the strong coupling is large, such thatbound states are formed, which cannot be describedperturbatively anymore. The description of hadroniza-tion needs to rely on parameters extracted from data.
These parameters are tuned in Monte Carlo simula-tions. Torbjörn Sjöstrand gives a detailed view of dif-ferent stages of the collision process and of their simu-lation.
The reconstruction of jets by reliable jet algorithmsand the identification of the primary source, gluonsor quarks of a certain flavor, is very important to ex-tract information about the underlying particle dynam-icsfromthedata.Jetsubstructurevariablescanprovideessential information about the decay of heavy parti-cles leading to boosted jets, as described by BogdanMalaescu, Dag Gillberg, Steven Schramm, and ChrisYoung.
11.1 Higher-order perturbative calculationsGudrun Heinrich11.1.1 IntroductionThe property of asymptotic freedom of QCD, togetherwith the fact that short- and long-distance effects inQCD can be factorized up to power corrections, allowsus to describe processes with high momentum transferas a perturbative series in the strong couplingαs, as il-lustrated in Eq. (11.1.1). For example, the cross sectionfor a process such as the production of a Higgs bosonthrough the collision of two protons with momentapaand pb, pa + pb →H+ X, has the formσpp→H+X =∑i,j∫ 10dx1 fi/pa(x1,αs,µF) ×∫ 10dx2 fj/pb(x2,αs,µF) ˆσij→H+X(αs(µR),µR,µF)+ O(ΛQ)p, (11.1.1)where the partonic cross sectionˆσij→H+X can be ex-panded asˆσij→H+X = α2sˆσ(0) + α3sˆσNLO + α4sˆσNNLO + ...
(11.1.2)The renormalization of ultraviolet singularites appear-ing in loop corrections leads to a dependence of bothαs and the partonic cross section on the renormaliza-tion scaleµR. Similarly, the absorption of collinear sin-gularities into the “bare” parton distribution functionsleadstoadependenceonthefactorizationscale µF.Thefunctions fi/pa(x,αs,µF) are the (physical) parton dis-tribution functions (PDFs), which can be interpreted asprobabilities to find a parton of typeiwith momentumfractionxofthe“parent”momentum pa inaproton(or,more generally, a hadron). This makes an assumption ofcollinearity of the parton’s momentum withpa, there-fore the factorisation described by Eq. (11.1.1) is alsocalled collinear factorisation . For more details aboutparton distribution functions we refer to Section10.2.
Factorization holds up to the so-called power correc-tions of order (Λ/Q)p, where the powerp is process-dependent and usually larger than one, see however,Ref. [161].
In Eq. (11.1.2), the partonic cross section at leadingorder (LO) in an expansion inαs is denoted by ˆσ(0),where for the sake of clarity the powers of the strongcoupling have been extracted. The next-to-leading or-der (NLO) cross section comes with one more powerof αs relative to LO, the next-to-next-to-leading or-der (NNLO) cross section with two more αs powersthan LO, etc. Of course such an expansion also canbe performed for the electroweak corrections, however,as α/αs(MZ) ≃0.1, the QCD corrections are usuallylarger, except in kinematic regions where logarithms ofthe form αln(M2W/ˆs)grow large. The dependence ofthe cross sectiondσpp→H+X on µR and µF is an arti-fact of the truncation of the perturbative series. There-fore,thedependenceontheseunphysicalscalesbecomesweaker as more perturbative orders are calculated. Thevariation of the cross section as these scales are variedaround a central scale – which should be chosen to beclose to the energy at which the hard interaction takesplace – therefore can be used as an estimate of the the-oretical uncertainty due to missing higher orders.
Higgs boson production in gluon fusion is somewhatspecial, as the leading order amplitude is already loop-induced, and because the NLO QCD corrections are ofthe order of 100%, which makes the inclusion of QCDcorrections beyond NLO a necessity for a satisfactorydescription of the data.
The perturbative expansion in powers ofαs is par-ticularly reliable for inclusive observables. If the phasespace for QCD radiation is restricted, large logarithmscan appear, which spoil the convergence of the pertur-bativeseriesin αs.Thisrequiresso-calledresummation,as described in detail in Section11.2. Here we will focuson calculations at a fixed order in the strong coupling.386 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGY11.1.2 Developments and statusNext-to-leading order QCD correctionsThedevelopmentofsystematictechniquesforNLOQCDcorrections started in the 1980ies with seminal workon e+e−–annihilation to jets [3303–3305] and hadron-hadron scattering [178], followed by pioneering develop-ments of techniques for one-loop calculations based onFeynman diagrams and tensor reduction [3306–3309].
In parallel, subtraction methods for soft and collinearreal radiation were established [180, 3310], leading tothe first differential NLO calculations of 2-jet produc-tion in hadronic collisions [3311–3313], while the firstNLO calculation of 3-jet production in hadronic colli-sions only appeared 10 years later [3314].
The calculation of NLO cross sections for(n−2)-jetproduction in hadronic collisions (or for(n−1)-jet pro-duction ine+e−–annihilation, as well as the calculationof amplitudes obtained by crossing) involvesn-partonone-loopamplitudesand (n+1)-partontree-levelampli-tudes with up to one unresolved (soft or collinear) par-ton, see Fig.11.1.1. The efficient calculation of one-loopn-point amplitudes forn≥5 represented a major chal-lenge in the 1990ies and led to the development of moreefficient methods to calculate one-loopn-point ampli-tudes,basedontheideatoexploitanalyticpropertiesofloop integrals if propagators are put on-shell (so-called“unitarity cuts”) [181, 3315–3317]. The emergence ofmethods to perform these cuts numerically [3318–3320],together with the automation of subtraction methodsfor unresolved real radiation at NLO, led to a new levelof efficiency, resulting in the availability of NLO QCDpredictionsformulti-particlescatteringwhichwerecon-sidered unfeasible some years before, such as 5-jet pro-duction at the LHC [3321], top-quark pair productionwith up to 3 jets [3322], Wb¯b production with up to 3light jets [3323], or the NLO QCD and EW correctionsto off-shellt¯tW production at the LHC, involving one-loop 10-point integrals [3324]. It also led to the develop-ment of automated tools providing one-loop amplitudesfor fully differential NLO predictions [3319, 3325–3331].
This remarkable jump in efficiency is often called the“NLO revolution”.
Beyond NLOThe next step, towards fully differential NNLO predic-tions, required not only major progress in the calcu-lation of two-loop integrals, but also the developmentof subtraction schemes for infrared (IR) divergent realradiation where up to two particles can be unresolved.
Multi-loop amplitudesFirst, the developments regarding loop integrals withtwo or more loops will be considered. A very impor-Fig. 11.1.1 Building blocks of an NxLO calculation for pro-cesses where the leading order is at tree level (in contrast toloop-induced). The higher order diagrams are only representa-tives of their class, the number of diagrams grows rapidly withthe perturbative order.
tant parameter characterising a Feynman integral be-sides the number of loops and legs is the number ofkinematic/mass scales. As an example, it is instructiveto consider the development of the calculation of 2-loop4-point integrals (2 loops, 4 legs): the analytic calcula-tion of the planar [3332] and non-planar [3333] two-loop7-propagator diagrams with massless propagators andlight-like legs has been performed in 1999, numericalchecks of these results in the Euclidean region were per-formed in Ref. [3334], the calculation of such integralswith one off-shell leg was completed soon after [3335,3336]. The first results for two-loop 4-point amplitudeswith massive propagators have been achieved by a nu-merical method [3337, 3338], leading to NNLO predic-tions for top quark pair production in hadronic col-lisions [3339]. The analytic calculation of two-loop 4-pointintegralswithtwomassivelegsandmasslessprop-agators,enteringforexampletheproductionof Z-bosonpairs or aW+W− pair, was completed around the year2015 for both the on-shell as well as for the off-shellcase [3340–3345]. However, the step to include mas-sive propagators leads out of the function class (so-called multiple polylogarithms) describing the above-mentioned objects analytically. Therefore, the calcula-tion of two-loop 4-point integrals with both massivepropagators as well as massive final state particles was11.1 Higher-order perturbative calculations 387performednumericallybeforeanalyticresultsappeared,examples are the two-loop QCD corrections to Higgsboson pair production [3346, 3347], Higgs+jet produc-tion [3348], gg →ZH [3349–3351] andgg →VV withmassive loops [3352–3354], whereV denotes a massivevector boson. Thus, one can roughly say that it tookalmost twenty years to increase the number of inde-pendent mass scales entering these diagrams from two(s12,s23), to five(s12,s23,mt,mV,mV′), where sij = ( pi + pj)2 and V′denotes a boson with invariant mass different fromV.
The timeline of available predictions for (differential)cross sections based on these integrals is shown in Ta-ble 11.1.1, illustrating how an additional mass scaleincreases the complexity. It is noteworthy that all in-tegrals with massive propagators, i.e. with a non-zeroentry in the third column, have been calculated withnumerical methods. For processes with jets in the fi-nal state, the subtraction of IR divergent real radiationwas the bottleneck, not the availability of the two-loopintegrals.
indep. massive/ internalkinem. off-shell masses process full σscales legs2 → 22 0 0 γγ 20112 0 0 jj 20172 0 0 γ+ j 20173 2 1 t¯t 20133 2 0 VV 20144 2 0 VV ′ 20153 1 0 V + j 20153 1 0 H+ j(HTL) 20154 2 1 HH 20164 1 1 H+ j 20183 0 1 gg → γγ 20194 2 1 gg → ZZ 20204 2 1 gg → WW 20205 2 1 gg → ZH 20214 2 1 QCD-EW DY 20222 → 34 0 0 3γ 20194 0 0 γγj 20214 0 0 3 j 20215 1 0 Wb¯b 2022Table 11.1.1Timeline for the availability of full NNLO crosssections at hadron colliders (or NLO cross sections for loopinduced processes) based on two-loop four-point or five-pointintegrals with an increasing number of mass scales. “HTL” de-notestheheavytoplimit,“QCD-EWDY”denotesmixedQCD-electroweak corrections to the Drell-Yan process.
More details on the methods employed for these cal-culations can be found e.g. in Refs. [196, 3355, 3356].
Real radiationFor many1 →3 or 2 →2 processes, such ase+e− →3 jets or di-jet production in hadronic collisions, theknowledge of the two-loop amplitudes was not the mainbottleneck on the way to fully differential predictionsat NNLO. Efficient schemes to treat the infrared (IR)divergent real radiation needed to be developed, andthe emergence of several schemes led to an explosionin the availability of NNLO results for LHC processeswith up to two particles or jets in the final state af-ter 2015, a development which is sometimes referred toas the “NNLO revolution”. The main methods to treatIR divergent real radiation beyond NLO can roughlybe classified into two categories: (i) methods based onsubtraction, and (ii) methods based on partitions of thephase space into IR-sensitive regions and hard regions,sometimes also called “slicing methods”. The latter in-troduce a dependence on a resolution variable whichcancels once the IR-sensitive and hard regions are com-bined. Subtraction methods aim at a local subtractionof the IR singular structures, i.e. a cancellation of singu-larities point-wise in the phase space, while for slicingmethods the compensations are non-local. This non-locality can lead to large numerical cancellations, how-ever, power corrections in the resolution variable canbe included to mitigate their impact. Reviews aboutrecent developments in IR subtraction schemes can befound e.g. in Refs. [195, 3356, 3357]. The main methodsare summarized in Table11.1.2.
The extension of methods to isolate IR divergentreal radiation to N3LO, i.e. the case of up to three un-resolved partons, in particular in the presence of taggedcoloured particles or jets, is one of the current chal-lenges in the field of high precision perturbative QCDcalculations.
While the complete automation of NNLO calcula-tions is probably not feasible in view of efficiency op-timisations that are process specific, libraries with alarge collection of codes providing NNLO predictionsare available, such asmatrix [3395], nnlojet [3362]or mcfm [3402].
Current frontier and recent developmentsAs shown in Fig.11.1.1, the calculation of NxLO cor-rections to processes with(n−2) identified particles orjets in the final state in hadronic collisions (where theleading order is a tree amplitude, as contrasted to loop-induced amplitudes such as Higgs boson production ingluon fusion), requires the calculation of amplitudeswith x−j loops andn+j legs, wherej = 0,...,x . Thecurrent frontier is, roughly speaking,x+ n≥6, havingin mind 2 →3 processes at NNLO, 2 →1 processesat N3LO or 4-loop form factors. However, the type of388 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYmethod NNLO examplessubtractionantenna subtraction e+e− → 3 jets [3358, 3359],[3360, 3361] pp→ 2 jets [3362, 3363],pp→ WHj [3364]sector-improved residue pp→ t¯t[3339],subtraction [3365–3367] pp→ W + c-jet [3368],pp→ 3 jets [3369]nested soft-collinear pp→ VH [3370, 3371],subtraction [3372–3374] VBF H [3375],mixed QCD-EW toDrell-Yan [3376–3378]ColorFul [3379, 3380] e+e− → 3 jets [3381],H → b¯b[3382]projection to Born VBF H [3383],VBF HH [3384],[3383, 3385] single top [3386, 3387]local analytic e+e− → 2 jets [3388]subtraction [3388–3390]4-dimensional schemes γ∗ → t¯t[3391] (inclusive)[195, 3392]slicingqT [3393, 3394] VV ′ [3395], t¯t[3396],mixed QCD-EW toDrell-Yan [3397, 3398]N-jettiness V + j [1980, 3399],[1776, 1980, 1981] H+ j [3400, 3401],di-boson [3402]Table 11.1.2 Methods for the isolation of IR divergent realradiation at NNLO and up to three examples of their applica-tion.
the involved particles is very important for the com-plexity of the calculation: all available complete N3LOresults to date involve only color singlets in the finalstate, see e.g. Refs. [3403–3407] for the Drell-Yan pro-cess, Refs. [187, 3408–3411] for Higgs boson productionin gluon fusion in the heavy top limit and Ref. [3412] forVH production. Inclusive N3LO results are also avail-able for Higgs [3385] and Higgs pair [3413] productionin vector boson fusion (VBF), Higgs pair production ingluon fusion in the heavy top limit [3414] and Higgsproduction in bottom quark fusion [3415, 3416]. Theextension to colored final states requires advances inthe treatment of IR divergent real radiation, for exam-ple N-jettiness soft and beam functions at this order,see e.g. Refs. [1987, 3417–3421] or triple collinear split-ting functions [3422, 3423], see also Ref. [3357] for moredetails.
Another ingredient which is needed to be consistentat this order are N3LO parton distribution functions,see Ref. [3044] for recent progress.
For processes such as Higgs boson decays into heavyquarks or the production of heavy quarks ate+e− col-lidersatthreeloops,massive3-loopformfactorsneedtobe calculated, and the presence of the additional massscale substantially increases the complexity of the cal-culation. Analytical and semi-numerical methods havepushed these calculations quite far [3424–3430].
Only very few results for three-loop amplitudes withmore than three legs exist. Remarkable recent resultsare the 3-loop amplitudes for q¯q →γγ [3431], gg →γγ [3432], q¯q →q′¯q′ [3433], q¯q →gg [3434] and gg →gg [3435]. For the case of one massive external leg, re-sults for planar master integrals exist [3436].
Another highlight on the 3-loop front is the calcu-lation of the NNLO corrections to Higgs boson produc-tion in gluon fusion with full top quark mass depen-dence [3437], which involves the calculation of 3-loopintegrals with two mass scales.
Considering x= 2,n = 5, i.e. processes involving 2-loop 5-point integrals, again the number of mass scalesis the critical measure of complexity. Results for com-plete cross sections have been achieved for processesinvolving only massless particles:pp→3γ [3438, 3439],pp →γγj [3440–3443] and pp →3 jets [3369], as wellas for the processpp→Wb¯b [3444, 3445].
At four loops, the computation of form factors hasseen enormous progress in the past few years [3446],culminating in the calculation of the complete analyticexpressions for the photon-quark and the Higgs-gluonform factors at 4-loop order [1919]. These form factorswill serve as building blocks for a future complete N4LOcalculation of the Drell-Yan process and Higgs bosonproduction in gluon fusion in the heavy top limit. N4LOresults forgg →H in the large-N soft-virtual approxi-mation already exist [3447]; results for soft correctionsto deeply inelastic scattering (DIS) at 4-loop order arealso available [3448].
Results at five and more loops mainly involve two-point functions, entering for example the calculation ofβ-functions,suchasthe5-loop β-functioninQCD[ 3449–3452] or in scalar theories [3453]. Five-loop contribu-tions to the anomalous magnetic moment of the elec-tron have been calculated in Refs. [3454–3457]. Resultsfor anomalous dimensions at six [3458, 3459] or sevenloops and beyond [3460, 3461] are available for scalartheories.
11.1.3 PhenomenologyThe progress described above concerning precision cal-culations in QCD has led to a plethora of phenomeno-logical results at unprecedented precision, such as de-terminations of the strong coupling described in Sec-tion 3.2, determinations of the W-boson mass, preci-sion measurements in Higgs- and electroweak physics11.2 Analytic resummation 389(see Sections12.4, 12.3) and top quark physics (see Sec-tion 12.5). Advances in jet algorithms and jet substruc-ture measurements (see Sections 12.2 and 11.5)) alsoplay a major role in the LHC precision program. Crosssections for inclusive jet production can be measuredat the LHC with an uncertainty of about 5% for cen-tral rapidities. This poses challenges on the theory side,in particular it requires a judicious choice of the cen-tral scale, as some choices can induce infrared-sensitivecontributions [3462]. Furthermore, the transverse mo-menta of the jets can reach values around 4TeV, mak-ing the combination of NNLO QCD corrections withNLO electroweak corrections indispensable to describethe high-pT region correctly. In order to make such pre-cision calculations usable efficiently for PDF fits orαsdeterminations, it is also important to have them avail-able in a flexible format, for example in the form of fastinterpolation grids, see e.g. Ref. [3463] for more details.
Together with ongoing progress in reducing PDFuncertainties, as well as in controlling non-perturbativeeffects and parton shower uncertainties (see e.g. Sec-tions 11.4, 11.3), precision phenomenology at hadroncolliders has reached a level which was unthinkable 50years ago when QCD was “born”.
11.1.4 OutlookThe calculation of perturbative higher order correctionsin QCD at high energies is a success story. Inventivenew methods have been developed to deal with the in-creasing level of complexity at higher perturbative or-ders. These technical advances were accompanied bya better understanding of important phenomenologicalconcepts, such as infrared-safe observables and jet al-gorithms, and of the limitations of fixed-order pertur-bation theory. These developments went hand in handwith increasingly precise measurements of QCD pro-cesses at high energy colliders, and they are importantpillars of the search for physics beyond the StandardModel.
While the uncertainties due to the truncation of theperturbativeserieswerethedominanttheoryuncertain-ties for a long time in the 50-years history of QCD, forprocesses where the N3LO level of QCD corrections isreacheditbecameclearthatotheruncertainties,suchasPDF uncertainties, parton shower uncertainties, quarkmass effects, parametric uncertainties (e.g. inαs,mt) orpower-suppressed and non-perturbative contributionsneed to be considered with high priority as well. Be-ing able to control them will play an important role inthe next 50 years of QCD and in the search for physicsbeyond the Standard Model.
11.2 Analytic resummationSimone Marzani11.2.1 Large logarithmsQCD processes that involve high-momentum transfer,usuallyreferredtoas“hardprocesses”,canbedescribedin perturbation theory. In this framework, theoreticalprecision is achieved by computing the cross sectionσforanobservable V,whichweassumehavingthedimen-sion of an energy scale, including higher- and higher-order corrections in the strong couplingαs, i.e. the so-called fixed-order expansion:σ(V) = σ0 + αsσ1 + α2sσ2 + α3sσ3 + O(α4s), (11.2.1)where the leading order (LO) contribution σ0 is theBorn-level cross section for the scattering process ofinterest. Subsequent contributions in the perturbativeexpansion σx constitute the next-tox-leading (NxLO)corrections. In the language of Feynman diagrams, eachpowerof αs correspondstotheemissionofanadditionalQCD parton, either a quark or a gluon, in the final stateor to a virtual correction.
Calculations of Feynman diagrams are plagued bythe appearance of divergences of different nature. Loop-diagrams can exhibit ultra-violet singularities. BecauseQCD is a renormalizable theory, such infinities can beabsorbed into a redefinition of the parameters that en-ter the Lagrangian. Throughout this discussion, it isunderstood that such renormalization has already oc-curred. Real-emission diagrams exhibit singularities inparticular corners of the phase-space. More specifically,these singular contributions have to do with collinear,i.e. small-angle, splittings of massless partons and emis-sions of soft gluons, either off massive or massless parti-cles. Virtual diagrams also exhibit analogous infra-redand collinear (IRC) singularities, and rather generaltheorems [3464–3466] state that such infinities cancelwhen real and virtual corrections are added together,thus leading to observable transition probabilities thatare free of IRC singularities. Moreover, in order to beable to use the perturbative expansion of Eqn. (11.2.1),one has to consider observablesVthat are “IRC safe”,i.e. measurable quantities that do not spoil the abovetheorems.
The theoretical community has put a huge effort incomputing higher-order corrections, as discussed in de-tail in Section11.1. One of the main challenges in thisenterprise is the treatment of the infra-red region andthe cancellation of the singular contributions betweenreal and virtual diagrams. Furthermore, the emissionsof soft and/or collinear partons are also problematic be-cause they can generate large logarithmic terms in the390 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYperturbative coefficientsσx, thus invalidating the fixed-order approach. The expansion of Eqn. (11.2.1) workswell if the measured value of the observable isV≃ Q,where Q is the scale which characterizes the hard pro-cess. However, it loses its predictive power if the mea-surement of V ≪Q confines the real radiation into asmall corner of phase-space, while clearly leaving vir-tual corrections unrestricted. For IRC safe observables,soft and collinear singularities cancel, but logarithmiccorrections in the ratioV/Qare left behind, causing thecoefficients σx to become large, so thatαxsσx ∼1. Be-cause these logarithmic corrections are related to softand/or collinear emissions, one can expect at most twopowers of L = ln QV for each power of the strong cou-pling:σ(V) = σ0 + αs(σ12L2 + σ11L+ ...
)+ α2s(σ24L4 + σ23L3 + ...
)+ O(αnsL2n).
(11.2.2)All-order resummation is then a re-organization of theabove perturbative series. For many observables of in-terest, the resummed expression exponentiates, leadingtoσ(V) = σ0 g0(αs)×exp [Lg1(αsL) + g2(αsL) + αsg3(αsL) + ... ] ,(11.2.3)where g0 is a constant contribution which admits anexpansion in αs. In analogy to the fixed-order termi-nology, the inclusion of the contributiongx+1, i ≥0,leads to next-tox-leading logarithmic (NxLL) accuracy.
Fixed-orderEqn.( 11.2.1)andresummedEqn.( 11.2.3)expansions are complementary. On the one hand, fixed-ordercalculationsfailinparticularlimitsofphase-space,indicating the need for an all-order approach. On theother hand, all-order calculations are only possible ifparticular assumptions on the emission kinematics aremade. Thus, the most accurate theoretical descriptionfor the observableVis achieved by matching the twoapproachesσmatched(V) = σf.o.(V) + σres(V) −σd.c.(V), (11.2.4)where the third contribution corresponds to the expan-sionoftheresummationtotheorderwearematchingtoand it is subtracted in order to avoid double counting.
For instance, if we were to match the resummed ex-pression Eqn. (11.2.3), computed to some logarithmicaccuracy to a fixed-order calculation, see Eqn. (11.2.2),performed at NNLO,σd.c. would correspond to the ex-pansion of the resummed result up to second order inthe strong coupling, relatively to Born term. Further-more, we note that, if the resummation is computed athigh-enough accuracy, the dangerous logarithmic cor-rections cancel betweenσf.o. and σd.c. and all the largecontributions are resummed inσres.
All-orderresummationispossiblebecause(squared)matrixelementandphase-spacefactorizeincertainkine-matic limits. Different methods to achieve such factor-ization have been developed in the literature. For in-stance, factorization can be obtained by studying di-rectly QCD amplitudes and cross-sections in the softandcollinearlimits.Then,resummationcanbeachievedby iteratively identifying factorization and exponenti-ation properties of QCD matrix elements and cross-sections [152, 3467, 3468]. Other approaches instead in-troduce non-local correlation operators, such as Wilsonlines, and exploit their renormalization group evolution[3469]. Finally, one can construct soft-collinear effectivefield theories (SCET) to describe the soft and collineardegrees of freedom of QCD [1761–1764, 1791, 1861,1863] (see Ref. [3470] for an extensive, review). There isa rich literature describing similarities and differencesof the various resummation approaches, see e.g. [3471–3476]. In this presentation we will mostly follow theiterative point of view.
11.2.2 T ransverse-momentum resummationThe transverse momentum (QT = pZT,pWT ,pHT ) distri-bution of electroweak final states at hadron colliders isone of the most extensively investigated observables inQCD. Studies ofQT spectra and related angular corre-lations of lepton pairs produced via the Drell-Yan (DY)process provide us with a useful testing ground for aneven more interesting Higgs and new physics program.
These processes are characterised by the presence oftwo distinct scales: the measuredQT and the invariantmass of the final-stateQ, which is close to the mass ofthe electroweak boson for on-shell production. There-fore, if we are interested in phase-space regions whereQT ≪Q, large logarithmic corrections appear. Theyshould be accounted for to all orders, in order to achievean accurate theoretical description of these observabledistributions.
Furthermore, one aspect of physics at hadron collid-ers that becomes important at smallQT is the role ofnon-perturbative effects commonly attributed to the in-trinsic transverse motion of partons within the proton.
One may therefore view any opportunity to compareprecise perturbative predictions with accurate experi-mental data for DY lepton pairs as a chance to assessthe size of non-perturbative physics; physics which alsoaffects the HiggsQT spectrum.
The literature onQT resummation is vast and sincethe seminal papers, which date back to the late 1970s,11.2 Analytic resummation 391early 1980s, e.g. [1282, 3477], there has been a continu-ous effort in producing accurate theoretical predictionsthat can describe the experimental data. For example,high logarithmic accuracy [1907, 3478–3485] has beenachievedandcomputerprogramsthatallowonetocom-pute NNLL predictions matched to next-to-leading or-der (NLO) for theQT distribution in case of colorlessfinal states in hadron collision have been available for alongtime,e.g.[ 3479,3480,3486–3491].Fixed-orderpre-dictions have reached NNLO accuracy and the resum-mation can be now performed to N3LL accuracy [188,1906, 3492–3495]. Results with partial N4LL resumma-tion have also been recently obtained [3407].
Moreover, observables such asφ∗ [3496, 3497] thatexploit angular correlations to probe similar physics asQT, while being measured with even better experimen-tal resolution, have triggered theoretical studies to ex-tend the formalism of QT resummation to these newvariables [3488, 3498–3501].
In this section we review the main ingredients ofQTresummation for an electroweak final state, i.e. Higgs orDY. For simplicity, we are going to consider distribu-tions which are fully inclusive in the electroweak bo-son decay products, as well as integrated in the boson’srapidity. The extension to more differential distribu-tions, including fiducial cuts on the final-state parti-cles, is possible. For convenience, we work at NLL and,as further simplification, we explicitly consider only theflavor-diagonalcontributions,whilerestoringfullflavor-dependence in the end.
Wecomputethedifferentialdistributionforthetrans-verse momentum of the boson (Higgs orZ/γ∗). At Bornlevel, we have gg → h or q¯q → Z/γ∗, so the bosonhas no transverse momentum, i.e. the distribution isproportional toδ(2) (QT), whereQT is the two-dimen-sional transverse-momentum. When computing higherperturbativeorders,wemustincludecontributionswithadditional partonsi in the final state. Thus, the bosoncan acquire a nonzero transverse momentum, such thatQT = −∑ikTi. Resummation is relevant when thetransverse momentum is much smaller than the mass(or virtuality) of the electroweak boson,Q2T = |QT|2 ≪Q2. This can happen in two situations: either all re-coiling partons have small transverse momenta or theirtransverse momenta, although not individually small,mostly cancel in their vector sum. Both these mech-anisms must be taken into account and, as we shallshortly see, this can be achieved if QT resummationis performed in Fourier space. If we denote withb theconjugate variable toQT, then the small-QT region cor-responds to large b = |b|and logarithms of QT aremapped into logarithms of1/b.
Thus, we consider the emission of an arbitrary num-ber of collinear gluons off the incoming hard legs. Thepartonic cross-section can be written asd2σdQT= σbornc¯c→F∞∑n=01n!n∏i=1∫[dki] (2Cc)αs(kTi)2π[zN−1i ¯Preal(zi) δ(2)(QT +∑ikTi)+ ¯Pvirtual(zi) δ(2) (QT)]Θ(kTi −Q0) Θ(1 −zi + kTiQ), (11.2.5)where we have taken Mellin moments with respect tothe longitudinal momentum fractionszi. The emittedgluonphasespaceis [dki] = dzidk2Tik2Tidφi2π andCc = CF,CAis the appropriate color factor. The firstΘ function ex-presses the fact that emissions below the cut-offQ0 be-long to the non-perturbative region of the proton wave-function, while the second one correctly accounts forthe large-angle soft region of phase-space. In order toachieve NLL accuracy, the strong couplingαs has to beevaluated at two loops, in the CMW scheme [152]. Theemission probability is described by the real and virtualmatrix elements (see e.g. App. E of Ref. [3502]):¯Preal(z) ={1+z21−z , for a quark,2z1−z + 2(1−z)z + 2z(1 −z), for a gluon;(11.2.6)¯Pvirtual(z) = ( −1)1+z21−z , for a quark,2z1−z + z(1 −z)+nfTR(z2 + (1 −z)2), for a gluon.
(11.2.7)For later convenience, we also introduce the leading or-der regularized splitting functionsPqq(z) = αs2πCF[1 + z21 −z]+,Pgg(z) = αs2π2CA[( z1 −z + z(1 −z)2)++ 1 −zz + z(1 −z)2 −23nfTRδ(1 −z)],(11.2.8)and the corresponding anomalous dimensionsγcc(N,αs) =∫ 10zN−1Pcc(z), c = q,g. (11.2.9)392 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYWe note that virtual corrections in Eqn. (11.2.5) donot change the transverse momentumQT and triviallyexponentiate.Thereal-emissioncontributionisalsofac-torized,withtheexceptionofthetwo-dimensionaldelta-functionconstraint.ThisiswhereFouriermomentswithrespect to the two-dimensional vectorQT become help-ful. We can exploit the relationδ(2)(QT +∑ikTi)= 14π2∫d2b eib·QTn∏i=1eib·kTi,(11.2.10)to fully factorize the real-contribution in Eqn. (11.2.5).
We obtainWreal(b,N) =∞∑n=01n!n∏i∫[dki] zN−1i (2Cc)αs(kTi)2π×¯Preal(zi)eib·kTiΘ(kTi −Q0)×Θ(1 −zi + kTiQ). (11.2.11)The series in Eqn. (11.2.11) sums to an exponential.
Thus, the resummed exponent is obtained by puttingtogether real, virtual and PDF (kTi < Q0) contribu-tions:R(b,N) = 2 Cc∫[dk]αs(kT)2π Θ(kT −Q0) Θ(1 −z+ kTQ)×(−zN−1 ¯Preal(z)eib·kT −¯Pvirtual(z))+ 2∫ Q2Q20dk2Tk2Tγcc(N,αs(kT)). (11.2.12)By rewriting zN−1 = 1 + ( zN−1 −1) and using thedefinitions in Eqs. (11.2.6), (11.2.7), and (11.2.8), weare able to reshuffle the contributions to the resummedexponent as followsR(b,N) = −∫ Q2Q20dk2Tk2T∫ 2π0dφ2π(1 −eib·kT)×[∫ 1−kTQ0dzαs(kT) Ccπ¯Pvirtual(z)−2γcc(N,αs(kT))]+ O(kTQ). (11.2.13)The factor(1 −eib·kT)essentially acts as a cut-off onthe kT integral. At NLL we have104R(b,N) = −∫ Q2b20/b2dk2Tk2T[∫ 1−kTQ0dzαs(kT) Ccπ¯Pvirtual(z)−2γcc(N,αs(kt))]= −ln Sc + 2∫ Q2b20/b2dk2Tk2tγcc(N,αs(kt)),(11.2.14)b0 = 2 e−γE, where γE is the Euler constant. Thus,we have successfully separated two distinct contribu-tions: the Sudakov form factor (Sc), computed here atNLL accuracy (and systematically improvable) and aDGLAP contribution, which evolves the PDFs from thehard scaleQdown tob0/b. Note that here we have onlyconsidered flavor-diagonal splittings. Off-diagonal onesdo not alter the Sudakov form factor and they are fullytaken into account by the complete DGLAP evolution.
Taking into account all the above effects, the all-order transverse momentum distribution for the pro-ductionof an electroweakfinal stateF frominitial-statepartons c and ¯c can be writtendσdQ2T= σbornc¯c→F∫dx1∫dx1∫ ∞0dbb2 J0(bQT)Sc(b,Q)×∫dz1∫dz2 δ(1 −z1z2x1x2sQ2)×[HFc¯c(αs(Q)) Cca1(z1,αs(b0b))C¯ca2(z2,αs(b0b))+ ˜HFc¯c(αs(Q)) Gca1(z1,αs(b0b))G¯ca2(z2,αs(b0b))]×fa1(x1,b0b)fa2(x2,b0b), (11.2.15)where we have introduced the Bessel functionJ0 andthe sum overa1,a2 is understood. The functionsGab,Cab, HFab, ˜HFab can be computed in perturbation theory,while fa denotes the the parton distribution functions.
For Standard Model Higgs production we haveF = h,c = ¯c = g, and H = ˜H, while for DY production wehave F = Z/γ∗ and c = q, and Gq,a = G¯q,a = 0 . Asalready mentioned, different resummation formalismsexist in the literature. They all agree at the perturba-tive accuracy they claim, but they may differ becauseof subleading effects. As an example, in Fig.11.2.1 weshowacomparisonbetweentheresummedandmatchedcalculation of Ref. [3495] and LHC data, collected bythe ATLAS collaboration [3504].
104 See Ref. [3503] for a generalization of this approximationto higher-logarithmic accuracy.11.2 Analytic resummation 39310−810−710−610−510−410−310−210−11/σdσ/dpℓℓt [1/GeV]NNPDF4.0 (NNLO)13 TeV, pp → Z/γ∗(→ ℓ+ℓ−) + Xsymmetric cutsuncertainties with µR, µF, Q, matching variationsNNLOJET+RadISHNNLO+NNLLN3LO+N3LLATLAS data0 10 20 30 50 100 200 500 1000pℓℓt [GeV]0.900.951.001.051.10Ratio to dataFig. 11.2.1 The lepton pair transverse momentum distribu-tion measured by the ATLAS collaboration at the LHC [3504]is compared to a resummed and matched calculation.QT re-summation is performed at N3LL logarithmic accuracy and itis matched to the N3LO fixed-order result, with respect tothe Born process, which corresponds to NNLO accuracy forthe transverse momentum distribution. The plot is taken fromRef. [3495].
11.2.3 Jets and their substructureAll-order techniques not only allow us to probe the dy-namics of electroweak bosons that recoil against QCDradiation, as discussed above, but can be employed tostudy the properties of the radiation itself in great de-tail. If we look at hadronic final states, we realise thatQCD radiation is not uniformly distributed, but ratherconcentrated in collimated sprays of hadrons that arecalled jets. Jets really live at the boundary betweenexperimental and theoretical particle physics and areabundantly used by both communities. They allow ustodescribecomplexfinalstatesintermsofafewobjectsrather than hundreds of particles. Furthermore, froma theoretical point of view, jets are closely related toquarks and gluons, i.e. the degrees of freedom of pertur-bativeQCD.Thus,jetdefinitions,commonlyreferredtoasjetalgorithms,musthavegoodtheoreticalandexper-imental properties. For instance, jet algorithms shouldbeIRCsafe,sothattheyyieldfinitecross-sectionswhenevaluated in perturbation theory [166].
Modern jet algorithms are based on the concept ofsequential recombination. Pairwise distances betweenparticles are evaluated in order to decide whether torecombine two particles. The metric used to evaluatethese distances characterizes the jet algorithm. Nowa-days, the most popular group of jet algorithm is thegeneralized kT family, for which the metric is definedbydij = min(p2pTi,p2pTj)∆R2ijR2 , d iB = p2pTi, (11.2.16)where pTi,pTj are the particles’ transverse momentaand∆R2ij istheirdistanceintheazimuth-rapidityplane.
R is an external parameter, which plays the role of thejet radius. Different choices for the parameterpare pos-sible. For instance,p = 0 corresponds to the so-calledCambridge-Aachen (C/A) algorithm [170, 171], with apurely geometrical distance. Forp= 1 we have thekT-algorithm [172, 3505], which by clustering particles atlow pT first, is likely to faithfully reconstruct a QCDbranching history. Finally, with the choicep = −1 weobtain the anti-kT algorithm [174], which clusters softparticles around a hard core, producing fairly roundjets in the azimuth-rapidity plane. It is interesting tonote that all algorithms of the generalizedkT familyact identically on a configuration with just two parti-cles: they are recombined if∆Rij < R. More detailsabout jets can be found in Sec.11.5. Although incredi-bly useful for phenomenology, jet algorithms introduceresolution parameters, such as the jet radiusR, ren-dering the computation of jet properties a multi-scaleproblem.
In the past decade, many observables have been de-vised to study the internal properties of high-pT jets,see for instance [3506]. The simplest example of suchobservables is the jet invariant mass, which is definedasm2jet =∑i∈jetpi2, ρ = m2jetR2p2T, (11.2.17)where pi are the jet constituents’ four-momenta and, inorder to emphasise the multi-scale nature of the prob-lem, we have also introduced the dimensionless ratioρ.
This ratio is small in the boosted regimemjet ≪Rpt,which is of particular interest at the LHC. As previ-ously discussed, when scales become widely separated,logarithms (of ρ in this case) become large and in or-der to obtain reliable predictions for this observable, weneed to perform all-order calculations.
We do not report here the details of the resummedcalculationforthejetmassdistribution,whichiscloselyrelated to the one of the thrust event shape [3468, 3507,3508], but rather we stress similarities and differenceswithrespectto QT resummation,describedabove.Largelogarithmic corrections always arise from the emissionof soft and/or collinear partons. However, final-statefour-momenta are combined differently in the two ob-servables and therefore a different integral transform394 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYis needed to diagonalize the invariant massδ-function.
Furthermore, because we are interested in the dynam-ics of a high-pT isolated jet, emissions collinear to theincoming legs do not significantly alter the jet prop-erties, leading to a simplified treatment of the PDFcontributions. However, there is a major complicationthatariseswhenperformingcalculationswithjets.Onlyemissions that are recombined into the jet contributeto the invariant mass, making it an example of a non-global observable [3509]. As it turns out, the presenceof phase-space boundaries noticeably complicates thestructure of soft-emissions and essentially invalidatessimple exponentiation. Furthermore, the actual shapeof the boundary depends on the jet algorithm of choice.
For instance, in the presence of many soft emissions to-gether with a hard parton, the anti-kT algorithm willalways cluster all soft gluons to the hard parton, be-having as a rigid cone algorithm, while the choice ofdifferent algorithms, such as C/A orkT, can give rise tomore complicated clustering sequences, see e.g. [3510]and references therein. The calculation of non-globallogarithms constitutes the bottle-neck of jet calcula-tions but thanks to an extraordinary effort of differ-ent groups, they can now be resummed at high accu-racy [1784, 1997, 3511–3517].
Thecalculationtechniquesdevelopedforthejetmasshave been extended to other jet substructure observ-ables. An interesting example is the family of jet angu-larities [3518]. These probe both the angular and thetransverse momentum distribution of particles withina given jet. They are defined from the momenta of jetconstituents as follows:λκα =∑i∈jet(pT,i∑j∈jet pT,j)κ(∆iR)α, (11.2.18)where∆i =√(yi −yjet)2 + (φi −φjet)2 , (11.2.19)is the azimuth-rapidity distance of particlei from thejet axis. Jet angularities are IRC safe forκ = 1 andα >0. In Fig. 11.2.2 we show a comparison betweenLHC data collected by the CMS collaboration [3519],for the so-called Les Houches Angularity (LHA), whichcorresponds to setting κ = 1 and α = 0 .5, and a re-summed calculation performed at NLL accuracy [3520,3521].
Despite the remarkable perturbative accuracy thatcan be achieved for jet observables, non-perturbativecorrections due to the hadronization process or origi-nating from multiple-parton interactions or pile-up, arerather large. Indeed, the resummed curve in Fig.11.2.2has been corrected for non-perturbative effects, which/Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet central dijetanti-kt , R = 0.4pT,jet ∈ [120, 150] Ge V/Bullet CMS dataNLO + NLL′ + NPSH-MC@NLO00.511.522.533.541dσ/d pTd2 σd pT dλ10.5/Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet /Bullet 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 100.20.40.60.811.21.41.6LHA λ10.5Theory/DataFig. 11.2.2 The Les Houches Angularity (LHA) distribution,which corresponds toκ= 1 , α= 0 .5 in Eq. (11.2.18) measuredby the CMS collaboration at the LHC [3519]. The data are com-pared to the resummed and matched calculation (NLL+NLO),supplemented by non-perturbative corrections [3520, 3521] andto the prediction obtain with a state-of-the-art Monte Carlosimulation using Sherpa at NLO QCD accuracy [3522]. Theplot is taken from Ref. [3521].
are important to ensure agreement with the data atsmall values of the angularity. The situation can begreatly improved if one considers “grooming” and “tag-ging” algorithms. Broadly speaking, a grooming proce-dure takes a jet as an input and tries to clean it up byremoving constituents which, being at wide angle andrelatively soft, are likely to come from contamination,such as the underlying event or pile-up. A tagging pro-cedure instead focuses on some kinematic variable thatis able to distinguish signal from background, such as,for instance, the energy sharing between two subjetswithin the jet, and cuts on it. Many of the algorithmson the market usually perform both grooming and tag-ging and a clear distinction between the two is diffi-cult. Regardless of their nature, these algorithms tryto resolve jets on smaller angular and energy scales,thereby introducing new parameters. This further chal-lenges our ability of computing predictions in perturba-tive QCD. However, if these algorithms are properly de-signed, they can effectively reduce contamination fromnon-perturbative physics, while maintaining calculabil-ity. An example of this is SoftDrop [1875]. This proce-dure steps backward through the C/A clustering treeof a jet and iteratively checks whether the transversemomenta of the two branches satisfy the conditionmin(pT1,pT2)pT1 + pT2>zcut(∆12R)β. (11.2.20)11.3 Parton showers 395The difficulty posed by substructure algorithms ingeneral, and SoftDrop in particular, is the presence ofnewparameters,suchas zcut andβ,thatslicethephase-space for soft gluon emission in a non-trivial way, re-sulting in potentially complicated all-order behavior ofthe observable at hand. In the soft limit, the SoftDropcriterion reduces toz >zcut(θR)β⇒ ln 1z 0, collinear splittings always satisfy theSoftDrop condition, so a SoftDrop jet still contains allof its collinear radiation. The amount of soft-collinearradiation that satisfies the SoftDrop condition dependson the relative scaling of the energy fractionz to theangle θ. As β → 0, more of the soft-collinear radia-tion of the jet is removed, and in theβ = 0 limit, allsoft-collinear radiation is removed [1876, 3523]. There-fore, we expect the coefficient of the double logarithmsin observables like the groomed jet mass, the origin ofwhich is soft-collinear radiation, to be proportional toβ. In the strictβ = 0 limit, collinear radiation is onlymaintained ifz >zcut. Because soft-collinear radiationis vetoed, the resulting jet mass distributions will onlyexhibit single logarithms, as emphasized in [1876,3523].
Moreover, non-global logarithms are found to be power-suppressed forβ >0, and absent forβ = 0. Finally, forβ <0, there are no logarithmic structures for observ-ables like groomed jet mass at arbitrarily low valuesof the observable. For example,β = −1 roughly corre-sponds to a cut on the relative transverse momentumof the two subjets under scrutiny.
The above understanding can be formalized into ac-tual calculations and the resummation of a variety ofobservables measured on SoftDrop jets has been per-formed to N3LL [1786, 1899]. This outstanding theo-retical accuracy, together with reduced sensitivity tonon-perturbative corrections, make SoftDrop jets a par-ticularly powerful way to probe QCD dynamics and jetformation.
11.2.4 OutlookIn this brief overview we have introduced resummationas a powerful tool that we can use to augment the abil-ity of perturbative calculations to describe the data.
We have given two examples of multi-scale processes,namely the transverse momentum of an electroweak bo-son and the Les Houches (jet) Angularity, for which theinclusion of all-order effects is mandatory in order to beable to describe the data.
Resummation provides us with the right tools tostudy emergent phenomena in QCD, such as jet forma-tion and it allows us to scrutinise fundamental prop-erties of the theory. The concept of factorization, i.e.
the ability of separating physical effects happening atdifferentenergyscales,isthefoundationofthewholere-summation program that we have discussed. Even moregenerally, we can say any QCD calculation, being itdone at fixed-order or at the resummed level, requiressome notion of factorization. Of particular importanceis the collinear factorization theorem [224] that allowsus to separate the perturbative, i.e. calculable, part ofa process from the non-perturbative one, which can bedescribed in terms of parton distribution (or fragmen-tation) functions. Resummation techniques allows usto uncover limitations and possible breakdowns of fac-torization [1857, 3524], which typically happen at per-turbative orders that are too high to be reached withfixed-order techniques. Thus, despite resummation be-ing based on the soft/collinear approximation of theperturbative approximation of QCD, it opens up a win-dow to fundamental aspects of the theory:Resummation just scratches the surface of QCD.
But it makes a mark. 10511.3 Parton showersF rank Krauss11.3.1 MotivationProducing charged particles in a high-energy collisioninitiatestheemissionofsecondarybremsstrahlungquanta.
Due to the large strong coupling and because of thegluon self-coupling, the radiation of gluons is of partic-ular relevance, and tens or even hundreds of secondaryquarksandgluonscanbeproducedinacascadeofemis-sions.
Apart from the wish to correctly describe particleproduction at collider experiments in all its facets, andpreferably based on first principles, there is another,more practical reason why this process of multiple par-ton emission is of great phenomenological relevance.
The confinement property of QCD prevents quarks andgluons to be directly observed and instead, they man-ifest themselves through hadrons, which constitute theobservablefinalstates.Unfortunately,todate,onlyphe-nomenologicalmodelsforthedynamicaltransitionfromquarks and gluons to hadrons in a process aptly dubbedhadronization have been developed, which rely on alarge number of parameters which have to be fitted –105 George Sterman, CTEQ school 2006.396 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGY“tuned” – to experimental data. Clearly, such a pro-gramme is sensible only, if the parameters are suffi-ciently independent from the hard process and ratherdepend on the properties of the parton ensembles at acommon low scale. This is realized by casting the mul-tiple emission of the secondary quanta, the parton cas-cade, into algorithms that systematically evolve the feworiginal partons in the hard process at a scale of largemomenta Q into resulting many–parton ensembles re-solved at a lower scaleQ0, at which hadronization setsin. The resulting algorithms are called parton showers,and one might think of them as numerical implemen-tations of a renormalization–group equation that con-nects these two scales,Q and Q0. They form an inte-gral part of modern event generators HERWIG[3525],PYTHIA[3526], and SHERPA[3522].
11.3.2 Parton Shower RealizationsSome first intuition about parton showers can be gainedfromthe(quasi-classical)spectrumofgluonsemittedbya fast moving color charge,dng = αSπdωωd2p⊥p2⊥, (11.3.1)exhibiting its characteristic divergent structure in thelimit where the emitted gluon becomes soft, with it en-ergy ω →0, or collinear with respect to the emitter,with its transverse momentum p⊥ → 0. These well–known soft and collinear divergences, typical for quan-tum field theories with massless (vector) particles can-cel for physically meaningful observables when bothreal and virtual emissions are taken into account [3527,3528]. In parton showers, which aim to simulate theemission of real quanta, this is implicitly taken into ac-count, by demanding that the emitted partons are re-solvable with a minimal energy and transverse momen-tum; divergences in unresolvable emissions then cancelthose from virtual corrections. Such a constraint is ef-fectively realized for example by demanding a minimaltransverse momentum,k⊥ >Q0 in emissions. The inte-grated spectrum depends logarithmically on the cut-off,and small values ofQ0 overcoming the smallness ofαsnecessitate the resummation of the infrared logarithms.
This physical picture is encoded in probabilistic lan-guage, by constructing a Sudakov form factor∆N→N+1(Q, Q0) = (11.3.2)exp−Q2∫Q20dΦN→N+1(t, z, φ) KN→N+1(ΦN→N+1),which yields the probability for anN-particle configu-ration with momenta{˜p}not to emit another particle(and therefore not to turn it into an(N + 1)-particleconfiguration with momenta{p}). The phase space el-ement for the emission,ΦN→N+1(t, z, φ), will dependon (1) the ordering parametert defined below; (2) thesplitting parameter z given by the light-cone momen-tum fraction or energy fraction of the emitted parti-cle; and (3) the azimuth angleφ, fixing the orientationof the emitted particle in the transverse plane of themission. The emission kernel KN→N+1(ΦN→N+1) de-pends on the phase space of the emission and on thestrong coupling αS(p2⊥), with the transverse momen-tum as preferred scale choice. In the collinear limit,t →0 with finite z, the kernel for a specific emitter(ij) splits into particlesiand j and reduces to the well-known corresponding DGLAP splitting kernels. In thesoft limit, z →0 which also forces t →0, the kernelshould approach the eikonal form,limz→0KN→N+1(ΦN→N+1(t, z, φ)) ∝ (pi ·pk)(pi ·pj)(pj ·pk) ,(11.3.3)where k denotes the color spectator. Owing to the cur-rent standard of using the leading-color approximationin the parton shower construction,k can be uniquelychosen.
Individual simulated events are seeded by the hardprocess, evaluated at a fixed perturbative order, anddressed afterwards with the parton shower. In markedcontrast to the forward evolution of the final-state par-ton shower, the parton shower in the initial state isdescribed by a backward evolution, back to the ini-tial beam particles and to a fixed, pre-defined state.
To enforce that the backward evolution of the partonshower arrives at the correct initial state, while respect-ing the evolution of its internal structure, emissionsare weighted by a ratio of parton distribution func-tions [3529],KN→N+1(ΦN→N+1(t, z, φ)) ∝ fi(x(ij)/z, µ2i)f(ij)(x(ij), µ2(ij)) .
(11.3.4)In this way the particle(ij), resolved at scaleµ2(ij) andwith momentum fractionx(ij), is replaced by the newinitial-state particle i, resolved at a lower scaleµ2i <µ2(ij) and with a larger momentum fractionxi = x(ij)/z.
The choice of a parton-shower realization has an im-pact on the accuracy with which the radiation patternis simulated. In first-generation parton-shower imple-mentations, the ordering parametert is either identi-fied with the virtual mass of the parton before emis-sion, t = p2(ij) = ( pi + pj)2 [3530, 3531] or with the(scaled) opening angle of the emission,t = E2(ij)(1 −11.3 Parton showers 397cos θij) [3532, 3533]. When the regular parts of the(massless) DGLAP splitting kernels atO(αS) are used,suitably limiting the allowed range forz accounts forthe effect of finite masses. Careful analysis of the radi-ation pattern indicated that angular ordering is an im-portant ingredient to the correctness of the simulation.
The ordering accounts for color coherence effects, andintroduces an explicit veto on increasing opening anglesof the virtuality-ordered parton showers. In contrast,the dipole shower formulation [3534] in ARIADNE[3535]explicitly fills the Lund plane [3536] in transverse mo-mentum p2⊥ and rapidityy of emissions. By setting theordering parametert= p2⊥ with the identification ofp2⊥as the inverse of the eikonal from Eq. (11.3.3), it ful-fils the color coherence requirements that give rise toangular ordering [3537]. A similar approach has beenchosen in VINCIA[3538], and extended to include ini-tial state showering and other improvements. The samelogic – using a form of transverse momentum as order-ing parameter – was usually also chosen in the second-generation parton showers, for example in Refs. [3539–3542]. The explicit inclusion of mass effects in the split-ting kernels forces to identify the splitting parameterz with a light-cone momentum fraction. To system-atically include universal higher-order effectsK fromthe two-loop cusp anomalous dimension, the custom-ary CMW scheme [152] replacesαS(p2⊥) −→αS(p2⊥)[1 + KαS(p2⊥)2π],K =(6718 −π26)CA − 109 TRnf , (11.3.5)where nf is the number of active flavors andCA andTR = 1 /2 are the usual QCD factors. Once an emis-sion, parameterized byt, z, andφ, has been found, theemission kinematics needs to be constructed, includ-ing the compensation of the transverse momentum ofthe emitted particle. Choices range from being local,i.e. contained to the splitter–spectator pair, to global,i.e. distributed over the fullN-particle ensemble. Theyoften reflect a preference for those schemes that lendthemselves to a direct matching to infrared subtractionschemes for next-to leading order calculations such asthe Catani-Seymour subtraction [180]. While these con-siderations sound like a minor technical detail, subtledifferences in fact have an impact on the overall accu-racy, as discussed below.
11.3.3 (N)NLO matchingDespite their success in describing the logarithmically-enhanced soft and collinear regimes of emission phasespace, parton showers usually lack accuracy in the hard,wide-angle regions of phase space, the realm of fixed-order perturbative corrections, and they do not cap-ture potentially large higher-order corrections to inclu-sive cross sections. Therefore the resummation implicitin the parton shower has to be matched to fixed-ordercalculations. Defining, respectively,BN(ΦN), VN(ΦN),and RN(ΦN+1) the Born-level, virtual and real correc-tions to a given process, and suppressing their phasespace arguments in the following, a calculation – accu-rate in next-to leading order (NLO) – can schematicallybe written asdσ(NLO) = dΦN[BN + ˜VN]+ dΦN+1 [RN −DN] ,(11.3.6)with the infrared subtracted virtual correction˜VN(ΦN)= VN(ΦN)+ BN(ΦN)⊗I(ΦN) and the real subtractionterm D(ΦN+1) = B(ΦN) ⊗S1(ΦN→N+1) both writtenin factorized form, and where I emerges from S1 byanalytically integrating over the one-particle emissionphase space.
This can be matched to a parton shower along twowell–establishedalgorithms.TheM C@NLOmethod[ 3543]makes use of the fact that the parton shower correctlydescribesthesoftandcollineardivergentregionsofphasespace and the emission kernelsKcan thus be matchedto the infrared subtraction termsSrequired in fixed-order calculations. Events that, at fixed-order, corre-spond to N-particle final states with Born-level kine-matics, are denoted as “soft” events and the partonshowerisattachedtotheminawayexactlylikeitwouldbe attached to the Born-level leading-order events. Sim-ilarly, the (N + 1) -particle events are dubbed “hard”events, and, again the parton shower starts like it wouldfrom any similar tree-level configuration. Simple ex-pansion in αS reveals that the MC@NLOscheme re-covers the fixed-order results, and augments them withthe resummation of higher-order terms from the partonshower. Despite its simplicity, the MC@NLOprescrip-tion has a practical downside, with the second term inEq. (11.3.6) possibly leading to events with a negativeweight, a typical feature of practically any higher-ordercalculation at fixed order.
This is alleviated in the POWHEGmethod [3544,3545], which defines an NLO-accurateN-particle crosssection, and dresses it, for its first emission, with a Su-dakov form factor where the parton-shower splittingkernel is replaced with a ratio of real and Born contri-bution. However, theN-particle phase-space dependentK-factor implicit in the first square bracket is appliedto the fullN+ 1-particle spectrum, which may overes-timate the hard region of emission phase space. To cor-rect for this, in practical applications of the POWHEG398 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYmethod, the real-emission phase space is divided, with asuitable profile function, into a soft and a hard regime,RN = R(s)N + R(h)N . Schematically, thendσ(NLO) = d ΦN[BN(ΦN) + ˜VN(ΦN)+∫dΦ1(R(s)N (ΦN ⊗Φ1) −DN(ΦN ⊗Φ1))]×exp[−∫dΦ1R(s)N (ΦN ⊗Φ1)BN(ΦN)]+ d ΦN+1 R(h)N (ΦN+1) . (11.3.7)Theregularpartonshoweristhenappliedtothe( N+1)-particle configurations. Simple expansion shows, again,the overall cross section and the fixed-order emissionspectrum atO(αS) are correctly reproduced.
NNLO calculations matched to parton shower so farhave been solely available for the production of colorsinglets,S.ThefirstrealizationwaspresentedinRef.[ 3546],based on the POWHEGmethod above. The underlyingidea is to provide a POWHEGmatching forS + p finalstates, with the additional parton p filling the phasespace down to the infrared cut-off of the parton showerand thereby providing NLO accuracy for the overallemission of the hardest particle. This sample is thenreweighted to reproduce the inclusive NNLO cross sec-tion for the production of the singletS - in the case ofa single particle usually achieved by reproducing its ra-pidity spectrum at NNLO accuracy. Based on multijetmerging introduced in the next section, the UNNLOPSmethod [3547] matches complementary phase spaces ofcolor-singlet production for the emission 0, 1, and 2 ad-ditional particles, described by adequately subtractedmatrix elements at the two-loop, one-loop, and tree-level respectively. There overall NNLO accuracy is ob-tained by defining a zero-emission bin and adjusting itscross section accordingly. An alternative approach hasbeen presented in the GENEVAalgorithm [1942] whichmatches the NNLO cross section forS production withNNLL resummation of 0-jettiness. Using this observ-able to define different regions of phase space allows tocombine the resulting parton level configurations witha suitably vetoed parton shower.
11.3.4 Multijet MergingMultijet merging provides another way to include exactfixed-order calculations into the parton shower, whichis especially useful for the description of samples withlarge jet multiplicities. The underlying idea is to com-bine (merge) calculations with0, 1, 2, etc. additionalfinal state jets into one inclusive sample, by decompos-ing the parton emission phase space into two regimes,one of hard jet production and one of soft jet evolution.
The algorithm achieving this at leading order [3548,3549] proceeds in three steps. Once a parton-level eventat fixed order has been produced, the jets are clus-tered back until a core process corresponding to the0-additional jet configuration has been found. The differ-ential cross section for this event is reweighted with ra-tios αS(µ(PS))/αS(µ(FO)) at each emission, withµ(PS)the scale the parton shower would use andµ(FO)) thefixed-order scale used in the calculation. The cross sec-tion is corrected with Sudakov form factors for the in-ternal and external lines, either with analytic expres-sions or by running the parton shower from the coreprocess and vetoing those events with a emissions lead-ing to additional jets. These steps transform the in-dividual inclusive fixed-order calculations into exclu-sive calculations for exactly0, 1, 2 etc. additional jets,and combine them with the resummation in the par-ton shower. The algorithm outlined above has been ex-tended to a merging of towers of NLO calculations, ef-fectively a merging of multiple MC@NLOsimulationswith increasing jet multiplicities in [3550, 3551].
11.3.5 Current DevelopmentsDrivenbytheeverincreasingrequirementsforimprovedtheoretical accuracy, parton showers have come underincreased scrutiny in the past few years, for example inRef. [3552]. Recent studies revealed that currently usedparton showers do not correctly fill the phase spacein logarithmically enhanced regions of multiple emis-sions [3553], limiting their logarithmic accuracy. Crite-ria to systematically asses the logarithmic accuracy ofparton showers and a solution to the problem abovewas presented in Ref. [183] and led to renewed activ-ity in creating better, parton showers that are accu-rate at next-to leading logarithmic accuracy for criticalobservables. Including higher-order terms, i.e. O(α2S)corrections, to the parton showers represents an impor-tant step to further increase the accuracy. The treat-ment of O(α2S) splitting kernels has been discussed inRef. [3554], and in Ref. [3555] the inclusion of differen-tial two-loop soft corrections has been presented. Buthigher-order corrections in the strong coupling are notthe only ordering parameter – the parton shower im-plicitly also resides on a leading-color approximation,and the impact of incorporating sub-leading color termswas studied for example in Ref. [3556, 3557]. This led tothe development of a new paradigm, to describe partonsplitting and ultimately to construct a parton showerat the level of amplitudes [3558].
While it is not certain where these activities willlead us in the future, they are testament to the im-11.4 Monte Carlo event generators 399portance and impact of the probabilistic description ofthe QCD radiation pattern in parton showers, which isnearly as old as QCD itself.
11.4 Monte Carlo event generatorsT orbjörn SjöstrandA pp collision at the LHC may lead to the productionof hundreds of particles, via a multitude of processesthat can range from the TeV scale down to below theconfinement scale. While perturbative calculations canbe used at high-momentum scales, currently there isno way to address lower ones directly from the QCDLagrangian. Instead QCD-inspired models have beendeveloped.
These models typically attempt to break down thefullcollisionprocessintoacombinationofrelevantmech-anisms, that require separate descriptions. Each in itsturn often can be formulated as an iterative procedure,where a set of rules are applied repeatedly. These rulesare expected to represent quantum mechanical calcula-tions that each gives a range of possible outcomes. Theresultingcomplexityissuchthatanalyticalmethodsareof limited use. Instead the rules are coded up and com-bined within a bookkeeping framework, where the evo-lution from a primary perturbative collision to a finalmultiparticle state is traced. Such computer codes arecalled Monte Carlo Event Generators (MCEGs), wherethe “Monte Carlo” part refers to the frequent use ofrandom numbers to pick outcomes according to the as-sumed quantum mechanical probabilities.
Such generators can be used in phenomenologicalstudies, but the main application is within the exper-imental community, at all stages of the experiment.
When an experiment is designed, it is important tocheck that the proposed detector has the capabilityto find key signals. When an experiment is run, trig-gers have to be optimized to catch the interesting eventtypes. When data is analyzed, the impact of detectorimperfections and background processes must be fullyunderstood. In order to address these issues, the outputof an MCEG is normally fed into a detector simulationprogram, that traces the fate of outgoing particles.
11.4.1 Event overviewEvents come in many shapes, depending on the col-lider and the random nature of the collision process.
As a starting point, consider a typical LHCpp event,and what processes are involved for it. Below these areenumerated, starting from the shortest time/distancescales and progressing towards longer ones. This givesMPIMPIdˆσ0······MesonBaryonAntibaryon· Heavy FlavourHard InteractionResonance DecaysMECs, Matching & MergingFSRISR\*QEDWeak ShowersHard OniumMultiparton InteractionsBeam Remnants\*StringsMinistrings / ClustersColour ReconnectionsString InteractionsBose-Einstein & Fermi-DiracPrimary HadronsSecondary HadronsHadronic Reinteractions(\*: incoming lines are crossed)Hard InteractionResonance DecaysMECs, Matching & MergingFSRISR\*QEDWeak ShowersHard OniumMultiparton InteractionsBeam Remnants\*StringsMinistrings / ClustersColour ReconnectionsString InteractionsBose-Einstein & Fermi-DiracPrimary HadronsSecondary HadronsHadronic Reinteractions(\*: incoming lines are crossed)Fig.11.4.1 Schematicillustrationofthestructureofa pp→ ttevent. Reproduced from [3526].
rise to a schematic picture with an onion-like struc-ture in some approximate measure of invariant time,Fig. 11.4.1.
– At the center of a collision there is sometimes a hardinteraction, i.e. one at a high-momentum scale, likein this case the production of a tt pair. Its crosssection is obtained by a convolution of a matrix-element (ME) expression and parton distributionfunctions (PDFs). More common are events with-out any discernible hard interaction.
– The hard interaction may involve the decay of reso-nanceslike t→bW,W →qq′ asshowninFig. 11.4.1.
– The core hard interaction may be dressed up byhigher-ordercorrectionsofmatrix-elements.Thispartlyoverlaps with the subsequent showers, so a consis-tent transition (matching and merging) is required.
– Perturbativeradiationfromthescaleofthe(dressed)hard interaction down to a lower cutoff is usuallysubdividedintoinitial-stateradiation(ISR)andfinal-state radiation (FSR). While partonic QCD branch-400 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYings dominate, QED or even weak branchings mayoccur. Also some hadron production may be mod-elled as part of the perturbative stage,e.g. of char-monium and bottomonium.
– Since hadrons are composite objects, several of theincoming partons may undergo (more or less) sep-arate perturbative subcollisions, so-called multipar-ton interactions (MPIs).
– Partsoftheincominghadronspassunaffectedthroughthe hard-interaction region, and emerge as beamremnants.
– Typically colors are traced through the perturbativestage in theNc →∞ limit. Apart from imperfec-tions caused by this approximation, there may alsobe dynamical processes that lead to color reconnec-tions relative to the naive assignments.
– The color assignments are used to combine partonsinto separate color singlet subsystems — strings orclusters — that each fragment into a set of primaryhadrons.
– To first approximation each subsystem fragmentsindependently, but there may be interactions be-tween them.
– The primary hadrons may be unstable and decayfurtherintosecondaryparticles,indecaychainsthatspan a wide range of time scales.
– Right after the fragmentation the hadrons may alsobe close-packed and rescatter against each other.
In most of the following subsections these aspects willbe described in somewhat more detail. Examples oflonger generator overviews are [3559, 3560].
11.4.2 A brief historyThefirsteventgeneratoroftheQCDeraprobablyisthe1974 one by Artru and Mennessier [3561]. It is based onthe concept of linear confinement, originally introducedin pre-QCD string-theory models of hadrons, but latersupported by the linear confinement found in quenchedlattice QCD, see Section4.3. It was not developed be-yond a toy-model stage, however, and was largely for-gotten. Instead it was the 1978 article by Field andFeynman [3562] that stimulated an interest in usingMonte Carlo methods to simulate jet physics. Their it-erative approach for the fragmentation of a single jetwas extended to e+e− →qqg three-jet events in theHoyer et al. [3563] and Ali et al. [3564] codes, whichplayed a key role in the discovery of gluon jets, see Sec-tion 2.2. The Lund string fragmentation model intro-duced the concept of a color flow inqqg events [3565],which was given experimental support by PETRA data[3566]. It helped establish theJetset implementationas a main generator for subsequente+e− machines.
The first QCD-based generator for pp/pp physicswasIsajet [3567],originallyintendedfortheISABELLEcollider, but much used at the SppS and Tevatron col-liders, and for SSC and LHC preparations. A few othergenerators were developed in the early eighties, but leftlittle impact, except for Pythia, which was built ontop ofJetset, with the same initial objective of mod-elling the color flow and its consequences. Later on thetwo programs were merged under thePythia heading.
The earliest generators used leading-order matrixelements to describe the perturbative stage. This wasinsufficienttodescribemultijettopologies.TheDGLAPequations and their extension to jet calculus [3568] sug-gested that parton showers could be used to generatemultiparton topologies. Several early showers were con-structed, but it was only with the Marchesini–Webberangularly-orderedshower[ 3532]thatcoherencephenom-ena were consistently handled. This was the startingpoint for theHerwig generator. An alternative was of-fered by transverse-momentum-ordered dipole showers,proposed by Gustafson [3537] and first implemented inAriadne. Today various dipole formulations are themost common shower type.
The combination of hard interactions and partonshowersgraduallybecamemoresophisticatedasvariousmatching and merging techniques were developed. TheSherpa program grew out of such efforts. It was alsothe first major generator written in C++ from scratch,whereas Herwig and Pythia had to be rewritten fromFortran to C++ to match LHC requirements.
TodayHerwig [3525], Pythia [3526], andSherpa[3522] are the three general-purpose generators used atLHC, or more generally for studies ate+e−/ep/pp/ppcolliders. There also are important dedicated programs,e.g. formatrixelementgeneration,suchas MadGraph\_-aMC@NLO [3328] and thePowheg Box [3569].
Adjacent physics areas, such as heavy-ion collisions,cosmic ray cascades in the atmosphere, or neutrino in-teractions, started their generator development some-whatlater,andpartlyundertheinfluenceofthegeneral-purpose ones above,e.g. for the high-energy hadroniza-tion descriptions. Typically the hard-physics aspectsbecome less relevant, and soft-physics ones more so.
These issues will be briefly addressed towards the end.
11.4.3 The perturbative interfaceA key task is to generate events of a predetermined typeor types. This could bee.g. W + jets, both as a signaland as a background tott production. Typically thereis a core hard interaction, that then is complementedby further perturbative QCD activity at varying scales.
In such cases the core interaction provides the natural11.4 Monte Carlo event generators 401startingpointforthedescriptionoftherestoftheevent.
Asalreadysuggestedabove,onemaydiscernthreemainstages:1. the generation of partonic events purely based onmatrix elements and parton distribution functions,2. the matching and merging stage, where Sudakovform factors generated by parton showers are usedto reject some of the events above, so as to avoiddouble counting, and3. the subsequent pure parton shower evolution downto a lower cutoff somewhat above theΛ scale.
The first of these is covered in Section11.1, and in Sec-tion 10.2 for PDFs, while the second two are describedin Section11.3.
Of special interest for the continued story are thecore 2 →2 pure QCD interactions, qq′ →qq′, qq →q′q′, qq → gg, qg → qg, gg → gg and gg → qq.
These are by far the dominant perturbative processesat hadron colliders. The main contribution ist-channelgluonexchange,whichgivesrisetoa dp2T/p4T divergencein thepT →0 limit.
11.4.4 T otal cross sections and diffractionAnother key task, at the other extreme, is to generatethe inclusive sample of all events at hadron colliders. Inpractice rare processes are generated separately, so theemphasis comes to lie on common QCD processes.
The total QCD cross sectionσtot is finite, related toa finite size of hadrons and a finite range of QCD in-teractions, owing to confinement. Currently there is noQCD-Lagrangian-based description ofσtot, but insteadphenomenological models have been proposed based onRegge theory, with free parameters that have to betuned to data. At a minimum one Pomeron and oneReggeon term is required to describe the energy depen-dence [1104], where the former can be associated witha trajectory of exchanged glueball states and the lat-ter with one of mesonic states, see Section8.1. Moreterms are needed in more realistic models. Notably, re-cent studies points towards the existence of an Odderonterm, see Section12.6.
The total cross section between two hadronsAandB can be subdivided into several partial ones, associ-ated with different event topologies:σABtot (s) = σABel (s) + σABinel(s)= σABel (s) + σABsd(XB)(s) + σABsd(AX)(s)+ σABdd (s) + σABcd (s) + σABnd (s) , (11.4.1)wheresis the squared collision energy in the rest frame.
ThesetopologiesareillustratedschematicallyinFig. 11.4.2.
AABBelasticABBXsingle diffractive(XB)AABXsingle diffractive(AX)ABX2X1double diffractiveAABBXcentral diffractiveABXnondiffractiveFig. 11.4.2 Main subclasses of the total cross section inABhadron collisions. The red bars represent the regions in rapiditybetween A and B where hadrons are produced. Reproducedfrom [3526].
In nondiffractive (nd) events the full rapidity range canbe populated by particle production, whereas in single,double or central diffraction (sd, dd, or cd, respectively)onlypartsofthisrangearepopulated,andinelastic(el)events none of it is. The relative composition changeswith energy, e.g. such that the elastic fraction is in-creasing. Roughly speaking, elastic is 25%, diffractive20% and nondiffractive 55% at LHC energies.
Manyapproacheshavebeenproposedtomodelthesepartial cross sections, both integrated and differentialones, notably again based on Regge theory. Common isthat the massmX of a diffractive system obeys an ap-proximatedm2X/m2X = dyX behaviour, whereyX is therapidity range of theX system. An elastically scatteredbeam particle is also associated with a squared mo-mentum transfert that obeys an approximateexp(Bt)shape at low t. The slope B depends on the collid-ing hadron types, the event topology and the collisionenergy, but the order of magnitude is 10 GeV−2, i.e.
⟨pT⟩∼ 0.3 GeV.
At low energies also other collision types occur, suchas resonant production and baryon annihilation.
The Ingelman–Schlein [3570] ansatz is commonlyused for the description of diffractive systems. In it,a Pomeron is viewed as a hadronic state, with its ownPDFs. Therefore the Pomeron–hadron subsystem canbe described in the same way as we will introduce fornondiffractive events in the following, at least for rea-sonably largemX, while a simpler description is calledfor at smallmX.402 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGY11.4.5 Multiparton interactionsAll generators assume that a nondiffractive event cancontain multiple parton–parton interactions, which canbeviewedastheQCDreinterpretationofthecutPomeronpicture of olden days [3571]. MPIs are necessary toexplain many aspects of hadronic collisions, such asthe wide multiplicity distributions, where most of themultiplicity is related to low-pT processes. The case oftwo hard interactions, Double Parton Scattering, is wellstudied theoretically and experimentally [3572]. Differ-ent models have been developed starting from the samebasic ideas. This section will begin with thePythiaapproach, which is also used bySherpa, and later thedifferences inHerwig will be outlined.
IthasalreadybeennotedthattheperturbativeQCD2 →2 cross section is divergent forpT →0, on the onehand, and that the totalpp cross section is finite, onthe other hand. The perturbative picture is based onthe assumption of asymptotically free colored partons,however, while the reality is that of partons confinedinside color singlet hadrons. Therefore a plausible reg-ularization of the pT → 0 divergence is provided bycolor screening,i.e. that partons of opposite color givesdestructive interference of scattering amplitudes. A pa-rameter pT0 is introduced inPythia as the inverse ofthe spatial screening distance. This is used to dampenthe conventional2 →2 QCD cross section by a factor(αs(p2T0 + p2T)αs(p2T)p2Tp2T0 + p2T)2, (11.4.2)which givesdσdp2T∼α2s(p2T)p4T→α2s(p2T0 + p2T)(p2T0 + p2T)2 . (11.4.3)A tune to data gives apT0 of the order of 2 GeV, butslowly increasing with energy, consistent with an in-creasing screening, as lower-x partons become accessi-ble at higher energies.
TheaveragenumberofMPIsinnondiffractiveeventsis given by⟨nMPI⟩= σpert(pT0)/σnd, neglecting a smallcorrection from the part ofσpert that should be associ-ated with diffraction. Hereσpert(pT0) is the integrateddamped 2 →2 QCD cross section. At first glance, thenMPI should be distributed according to a Poissonian,with nMPI = 0 removed, since zero MPIs correspondsto the two hadrons passing through without any inter-actions.
This assumes that all collisions are equivalent, how-ever. More plausibly, the impact parameter b of thecollision plays a role, where central collisions gener-ate more activity than peripheral ones. To model this,an ansatz for the matter distribution inside a hadronis required. The simplest choice is a three-dimensionalGaussian, since then the convolution of two hadronsis easily integrated over the collision process to give atwo-dimensional Gaussian O(b). Fits to data prefer asomewhat more uneven matter distribution,e.g. with“hot spots” of enhanced activity around the three va-lence quarks.
The actual generation of MPIs can conveniently bearranged in a falling sequence of transverse momentawith √s/2 > pT1 > pT2 > ··· > pTn > 0. Neglectingthe impact-parameter dependence for a moment, theprobability for theith MPI becomesdPdpTi= 1σnddσpertdpTiexp(−∫ pT(i−1)pTi1σnddσpertdp′Tdp′T),(11.4.4)with a fictitiouspT0 = √s/2. The exponential expressesthe probability to have no MPIs betweenpT(i−1) andpTi, as comes out of Poissonian statistics and in ex-act analogy with the Sudakov form factor of partonshowers. With impact parameter included, theb is se-lected proportional to O(b) d2b, and the pT selectionprocedure acquires an enhancement/depletion factor ofO(b)/⟨O⟩.SequenceswithoutanyMPIsrequirearestartwith a newb.
So far inclusive nondiffractive events have been con-sidered. Alternatively one specific hard interaction isstudied, and an underlying event should be added toit. Then again ab is selected according toO(b), andan enhancement/depletion factor is defined as before.
The upperpT limit for MPIs now depends on context.
If the hard interaction is QCD2 →2 above somepTminthen its pT should be equated with apT1 of the MPIsequence, and subsequent ones be below that, or elsehigh pT scales would be double counted. If the hard in-teraction is something else, then there is no such doublecounting, and MPIs can start from the highest possiblescale.
The description ofn MPIs requires n-parton PDFs,f(x1,Q21; x2,Q22; ... ; xn,Q2n),whicharenotknownfromfirst principles or from data. An approximate approachis to make use of thepT-ordering of MPIs, such that thefirst interaction uses conventional PDFs, while subse-quent MPIs use more and more modified ones. Therebystandard phenomenology is preserved in the hard re-gion. Subsequently momentum conservation requires agradually reduced xi range, within which PDFs aresqueezed. Also flavor conservation must be respected.
If a valenceu quark is taken out of a proton, say, thenonly oneu quark remains, and the valenceu distribu-tion must be normalized to 1 rather than 2. If insteada seauquark is extracted, then theusea must containone parton more thanusea, which can be implemented11.4 Monte Carlo event generators 403by having one valence-likeu in addition to the normaluand usea distributions. Finally, when the valence-likedistributions have been properly normalized, the gluonand sea distributions are uniformly rescaled so as toobey the momentum sum rule.
With the evolution of ISR and FSR parton showersusually formulated in terms of a decreasing sequenceeach ofpT values, the MPIs now add a third sequence.
In Pythia they are fully interleaved into one commonsequence. Thus the key evolution equation isdPdpT=(dPMPIdpT+ dPISRdpT+ dPFSRdpT)×S (11.4.5)where S represents the Sudakov factor, obtained by ex-ponentiation of the real-emission rate, integrated fromtheprevious pT scaletothecurrentone,cf.Eqn.( 11.4.4).
In this way the harder part of the event sets the stagefor what can occur at softer scales. Notably MPIs andISRcompeteforthedwindlingamountofmomentuminthe beams, as represented by the modified PDFs. ThepT evolution should not be viewed as one in physicaltime; actually all MPIs occur at (almost) the same col-lision time t = 0 , while lowerpT scales means earliertimes t< 0 for ISR and later timest> 0 for FSR.
The Herwig description of MPIs [3573] splits theminto a hard and a soft component, separated at a scalepminT (s). The perturbative cross sectiondσQCD/dpT isrecovered abovepminT (s), while a simple tuneable shapedσsoft/dpT is used for 0 < pT < pminT (s), with theconstraints that it must vanish atpT = 0 and matchdσQCD/dpT at pminT (s). The electromagnetic form fac-tor is used to represent the impact-parameter profile ofprotons. This gives an overlap functionA(b,µ) = µ296 π(µb)3 K3(µb), (11.4.6)where∫d2bA(b) = 1 , and µ are used as free parame-ters, separately set for the hard and soft components,for more flexibility. Combining, an eikonal is defined asχtot(b,s) = 12 Ahard(b,µhard) σQCD(s,pminT ) (11.4.7)+ 12 Asoft(b,µsoft)σsoft(s,pminT ) , (11.4.8)where σQCD and σsoft are the respectivepT-integratedcross sections. The number of MPIs at a givenbis givenby a Poissonian, as inPythia, with⟨n(b,s)⟩= 2χ(b,s).
The eikonal formalism also predicts other quantities,such as total and elastic cross sections, and the elasticslope, that can be used to constrain the free parametersof the model.
When a hard interaction has been selected inHer-wig, and been associated with an impact parameterb,the number of hard and soft additional MPIs can be se-lected according to Poissonians. The hard interactionsare generated first, and thereafter the soft ones. UnlikePythia they are not ordered inpT within the hard andsoft groups, and there is no rescaling of PDFs. Also theISR and FSR associated with an interaction are recon-structed before the next is considered. For the hardestinteraction the ISR is forced to reconstruct back to avalence quark, while for subsequent ones the ISR evo-lution is forced back to a gluon. This gluon can thenbe color-attached to the hardest interaction itself. TheMPIs together may take more momentum out of theprotons than is available, given the lack of PDF rescal-ing. When that happens, the latest MPI is regenerated,but if repeated attempts fail the MPI generation maybe interrupted with a lower MPI number than intended.
11.4.6 Beam remnants and color reconnectionSince the MPI+ISR machinery inHerwig reconstructsback the perturbative activity to one single valencequark, having been taken out of an incoming proton,the other two valence quarks together form a diquarkremnant, with opposite color to the one quark takenout. Four-momentum conservation fixes the remnantmomentum.
The situation is more complicated inPythia, sincethe MPI+ISR can extract a variable number of “initia-tor” partons out of the incoming proton, leaving behindmultiple quarks and antiquarks. Then ad hoc probabil-ity distributions are used to share the remnant longitu-dinal momentum between them. The initiator partonsalso carry a transverse momentum, a so-called primor-dial kT, that is to be compensated by the remnant.
When the remnant consists of the several partons, thesemay also have a relative kT component. The size ofall these transverse kicks should be at or below thehadronic mass scale, though empirically they appearto be at the higher rather than at the lower end of theexpected range.
Thecolorlinesoftheinitiatorpartonsnaivelystretchfrom the remnants in through the hard interaction atthe core of each MPI,i.e. usually fill the whole rapidityrange. If so, the average charged multiplicitynch of anevent increases linearly with the number of MPIs, up tocorrections from momentum conservation and the de-tails of the remnant handling. Since all MPIs will beequivalent, a constant average transverse momentumper hadron should result, i.e. a flat ⟨pT⟩(nch) curve.
Instead an increasing⟨pT⟩(nch) is observed at hadroncolliders.
Thenaturalexplanationforthisphenomenoniscolorreconnection (CR). Specifically, it is assumed that the404 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYqqqq⇒qqqq(a)qqqq⇒qqqq(b)Fig. 11.4.3 Schematic illustration of color reconnection. (a)Simple flip. The arrows indicate flow from color to anticolor.
(b) Junction reconnection. Note changed direction of the longline, according to3 ⊗ 3 = 3 (⊕6).
color lines stretched between all final-state partons canbe rearranged so as to reduce the overall length. Thenumber of possible rearrangements increases with thenumber of MPIs, such that the⟨nch⟩increase is smallerfor each further MPI. The perturbativepT kick of eachMPI remains, however, so when thispT is shared be-tween fewer particle the result is an increasing⟨pT⟩.
Many CR models have been implemented over theyears, in all three main generators, and it would carrytoo far to discuss each in detail. A frequent startingpoint is that standard parton showers operate in theNc →∞ limit, and thus miss corrections of order1/N2cat each shower branching. One possible approach isto do the evolution in color space more carefully, andthereby be able to formulate CR as a consequence ofsuch subleading corrections. More common is to formu-late CR on the nonperturbative level, but then coloralgebra should be used to restrict the rate at which itcan occur.
Also common for many nonperturbative approachesis that a key role is assigned to the string length λbetween two color-connected partonsi and jλij ≈ln(1 + m2ijm20)= ln(1 + (pi + pj)2m20). (11.4.9)Here m0 ≈mρ is a typical hadron mass, and 1 has beenadded to ensure thatλ≥0. With this definitionλ is areasonable measure of how many hadrons typically willbe produced by the string. A flip of two color-connectedpairs (i,j) and (k,l) into (i,l) and (k,j), Fig.11.4.3a,corresponds to a net change∆λ = λil + λkj −λij −λkl. The assumption is that∆λ <0 reconnections arefavoured.
Further CR variants include ones that change thenumber of string pieces, say by taking a central gluonZ0stringZ0clusterFig. 11.4.4String versus cluster fragmentation. At the end ofthe perturbative evolution, the vertical dashed line, strings aredirectly attached, red regions. Alternatively, a nonperturbativeg → qq stage is inserted before clusters are formed, magentaregions.
connected to both remnants and putting it on an al-ready existing central string piece. Of recent specialinterest is junction reconnection [3574]. A junction isthe center of a Y shape where three string pieces cometogether, and topologically is the carrier of the baryonnumber. Two strings can collapse to one in a central re-gion with the production of a junction and antijunctionnear either end, Fig.11.4.3b. This gives an enhancedbaryon production. In the cluster model a similar ef-fect can be obtained by letting three alignedqqclustersrearrange into oneqqq and oneqqq cluster.
CR ought to be possible only when the strings con-cerned overlap in space–time. For normalpp collisionsthis is almost automatic, since most strings run more-or-less parallel with the collision axis within a smalltransverse region. Space–time should be taken more se-riously e.g. in e+e− →W+W− →q1q2q3q4, where theW± decay angles will influence the amount of overlap.
Models have been developed to this end, and predic-tions agree well with the combined LEP data [3575].
The best description is obtained with an∼50% CRrate, but unfortunately statistics is limited and a no-CR scenario is only disfavoured at the 2.2σ level.
11.4.7 HadronizationThere are two main fragmentation models in commonuse: strings and clusters. Both start out from the colorflow topologies set up according to the previous sec-tions, in theNc →∞ limit. Specifically, eachq →qgand g →gg leads to a new uniquely defined color linebetween the two daughter partons. The string model re-tains all the gluons produced in the perturbative stage.
A string can therefore be stretchede.g. like q−g1 −g2 −g3 −q, where each color line between two adjacentpartons is unique. In the cluster model the perturbative11.4 Monte Carlo event generators 405shower is followed by a semi-perturbative step where allgluons branch byg →qq. The system therefore subdi-vides into smallerqqclusters.This key difference is illus-trated in Fig.11.4.4. The string is central inPythia,while Herwig and Sherpa implements clusters. In thelatter program there is an interface toPythia stringsto allow comparisons. In the following key features willbe presented in some more detail.
The string approach is based on the assumption of alinear confinement potential, as supported by quenchedlatticeQCDphenomenology.Inasimple qqsystemstud-ied in the rest frame, e.g. from a Z0 decay, the po-tential can then be written as V(r) = κr, where ris the separation andκ is the string tension. Empiri-cally κ ≈1 GeV/fm, determined mainly from hadronspectroscopy. The mathematical one-dimensional stringstretchedstraightbetweenthe qandthe qcanbeviewedas defining the center of a physical chromoelectric fluxtube, with transverse dimensions comparable to hadronsizes, i.e. with a radius of around 0.7 fm. It is not sett-led whether this tube should be viewed in analogy witha vortex line in a type II superconductor, or with anelongated bag in a type I one, or with an intermediatebehaviour, but for the basic considerations this is alsonot important.
If the string does not break, it will undergo a yo-yo-like oscillatory motion, where initially the quarks carrythe full energy of the system, but gradually lose it tothe string being stretched out between them. Masslessquarkswillreachamaximalseparationwherealltheen-ergy is stored in the string, and then the string tensionwill pull them back, so that they again cross, carryingthe full energy. The key relation is that the masslessendpoint quarks, moving out along the±z axis, obey⏐⏐⏐⏐dEdt⏐⏐⏐⏐=⏐⏐⏐⏐dEdz⏐⏐⏐⏐=⏐⏐⏐⏐dpzdt⏐⏐⏐⏐=⏐⏐⏐⏐dpzdz⏐⏐⏐⏐= κ (11.4.10)(with c = 1 ). If such a system is boosted along thezaxis theq and q start out with different energies, whichmeansthattheirturningpointsoccuratdifferenttimes,which gives the expected net motion of the system asa whole. The string tension remains unchanged by theboost, and a string piece in the new frame still carriesno three-momentum. This may seem counterintuitive,but note that the boost will take an equal-times stringpiece to one where the endpoints are at different times,and if viewed this way the boosted string piece will pickup the expected momentum.
Now introduce the possibility for a string to breakby the production of a newqiqi pair somewhere alongthe string. In lattice QCD this corresponds to goingfrom the quenched to the unquenched situation. Eachbreak splits the original color singlet system into twospacetimequarkantiquarkpair creationFig. 11.4.5String fragmentation of aqqsystem, where yellowregions represents snapshots in time of the string pieces beingstretched out. Reproduced from [3576].
separate smaller ones. A sequence of breaks thus givesan ordered singlet chainqq1 −q1q2 −q2q3 −... −qn−1q,and these singlets can be associated with the primary(i.e. before any decays) hadrons. Such a sequence ofbreaks is illustrated in Fig.11.4.5. Notice that, in thispicture, each produced hadron undergoes a yo-yo mo-tion of its own.
If the qi have m = pT = 0 then a qiqi pair can beproduced on-shell in a single vertex, and afterwards bepulled apart. The partons are virtual initially when thisis not the case, and each has to tunnel a distancemT/κuntil it has absorbed enough energy from the string tocome on-shell. This leads to a suppression factorexp(−πm2Tκ)= exp(−πm2κ)exp(−πp2Tκ).
(11.4.11)The transverse momentum kick can be compensatedlocally between the qi and qi, which defines a vectorsum for eachqiqi+1 hadron. Empirically the observed⟨pT⟩is somewhat higher than predicted this way, whichcouldberelatedtothecutoffofsoftgluonsinthepartonshower, so for tuning purposes thepT width of primaryhadrons is considered a free parameter.
Thetunnelingalsoimpliesthatnonperturbativepro-duction of heavier quarks is suppressed, for charm andbottom to a negligible level. For the strangeness sup-pression it is not clear what quark masses to use — theobserved s/u≈0.25 production ratio is in between re-sults for current algebra and constituent masses — soagain it is considered a free parameter.
Neglecting orbitally and radially excited states, aproduced meson belongs either to the pseudoscalar orto the vector multiplet. Naive spin counting would im-ply a1 : 3 production rate, but vectors are suppressed406 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYby the heavier mass, to an extent that is not easily cal-culated from first principles, so further parameters areintroduced. The many flavor-related parameters is thebiggest weakness of the string model.
For baryon production antidiquark–diquark stringbreaks are introduced, in analogy with quark–antiquarkones, with the diquark in a color antitriplet. Again tun-neling,spinandmassfactorsarecombinedinproduction-rateparameters.Theoveralldiquarkbreakfractionneededtodescribetheobservedbaryonproductionrateisaround10%. A modified scenario is the popcorn one. In it, aqq pair can be produced with a color that does notscreen the endpoint ones, such that it does not breakthe string. Inside that pair one or two further breaksmay occur, where the latter would allow a meson to beproduced between the baryon and the antibaryon.
String breaks on the average ought to be producedalong a hyperbola of fixed invariant time, which trans-lates into a flat rapidity plateau of produced hadrons.
Then particle production would start in the middle ofthe event and spread outwards, Fig.11.4.5. But actu-ally all string breaks have a spacelike separation to eachother, so there is no Lorentz-frame-independent defini-tion of what comes first. It is then more convenient tobegin at an endpoint quark and work inwards. The finalresult should be independent of the order used, whichis satisfied for an almost unique fragmentation functionshapef(z) = 1z (1 −z)a exp(−bm2Tz). (11.4.12)Here aand bare two free parameters andmT the trans-verse mass of the hadron considered. The z variableparametrizes the fraction of remaining lightcone mo-mentum that the hadron takes. That is, if the quarkis moving in the+z direction, thenz is the fraction ofE+ pz taken, with1 −z the fraction remaining to beused in subsequent steps. Note that heavier hadrons onthe average take a larger fractionz than lighter ones.
The f(z) shape may be generalized slightly to take intoaccount of the effect of different quark masses, notablyfor massive (c or b) endpoint quarks.
The extension to more complicated string topolo-gies involves no new principles or parameters. In aqqgevent, Fig. 11.4.6, the Nc →∞ color algebra impliesthat one color is shared betweenq and g, and anotherbetween g and q, with no direct connection betweenqandq. The strings pulled out now have a transverse mo-tion and thus a higher energy per unit length, but lesslength is pulled out per unit time, and these two effectexactly compensate to give|dE/dt|= κ for the quarksand twice that for the gluon. This is to be comparedwith the QCD color-charge ratioNc/CF = 9 /4. Againquarkantiquarkgluonstring motion in the event plane(without breakups)Fig. 11.4.6String motion in aqqg system. Yellow regions rep-resent snapshots in time of the string pieces. The fragmentationof the strings is suppressed for clarity. Reproduced from [3576].
the two string pieces will fragment along their length,with one hadron formed around the gluon kink, ob-tainingfour-momentumcontributionsfrombothpieces.
The generalization to multigluon systems is obvious,and also closed gluon loops can be addressed in thisway.
The string motion becomes more complicated whena gluon is soft or collinear, with new string regions aris-ing. The punch line, however, is that the total stringmotion is only mildly affected by such gluon emissions,although technical complications arise.
The occasional low-mass string also needs some spe-cial care, and in the extreme case it may become nec-essary to force the endpoint flavor content to form asingle hadron, with four-momentum conservation beingensured by exchange with another parton or hadron.
LHC pp data has revealed several unexpected fea-tures,notablythatfragmentationpropertieschangewhenthe multiplicity is increased, towards more strangenessand baryon production, and with signs of collectiveflow, both in the direction of the heavy-ion behaviour.
Possibly a quark–gluon plasma is being formed, butin a string context it is also worthwhile to considerhow the environment,i.e. the close-packing of stringsat high multiplicities, could perturb the standard frag-mentation picture. One such potential effect is colorrope formation, i.e. that several parallel strings com-bine into an object in a higher color representation[3577]. Then baryon and strangeness production is en-hanced. Baryons can in addition be enhanced by theaforementionedjunctionCRmechanism.Therecanalsobe a repulsive force between strings, so-called shove,that can give rise to collective flow [3578]. It remainsto be seen whether these ideas can be combined into a11.4 Monte Carlo event generators 407new coherent framework in agreement with LHC obser-vations.
The cluster model is based on the concept of pre-confinement [3579] during the parton-shower evolution.
That is, each color line (forNc → ∞) tends to cor-respond to a low-mass system, with only a small tailtowards larger masses. The model becomes even moresuggestive if it is assumed that all gluons branch intoquarks, g →qq, at the end of the cascade, such thateach color line is associated with a separate color sin-glet cluster. This would occur naturally if constituentmasses obeymg ≥2mu = 2md, as is supported by lat-tice QCD. Several cluster studies have been presentedover the years. Here the generic features are outlined.
A gluon decays into any kinematically allowedqqpair according to its phase-space weight, which impliesa dependence on the choice of gluon and quark con-stituent masses, notably whetherss can occur at thisstage. Thereafter eachq1q2 cluster decays isotropicallyinto a two-body state, hadrons q1q3 and q3q2, whereq3 may also represent a diquark, resulting in baryonproduction. The hadrons are picked at random amongall possibilities consistent with the flavors, according torelative weights. These weights are the product of thespin factor2s+ 1 for each final hadron and the phase-space factor 2p∗/m, where p∗ is the common magni-tude of the three-momentum of the hadrons in the restframe of the cluster with massm. In some cases, suchas π0 −η−η′, also the mixing of identical-flavor statesneeds to be included in the weight. It is also possible toallow an overall extra factor for a multiplet, notably toenhance baryon production.
A number of improvements have been introduced tothis basic picture, as follows.
When the four-momenta of the cluster constituentq1 and q2 are combined into the four-momentum of thecluster, the tail to large cluster masses is suppressed,but it is not completely absent. It is therefore assumedthatsuchclusterscanfissionintotwosmallerones,pref-erentially aligned along theq1q2 axis. Flavor-dependentparameters are introduced to provide the mass abovewhich a cluster must break, and others to describe themass spectrum of the daughter clusters. The fission pro-cedure can be repeated on the daughters, if necessary.
In e+e− events ∼15% of the clusters need to be split,but these account for∼50% of the final hadrons.
If baryons only are produced as baryon–antibaryonpairs inside isotropically decaying clusters then thatdoesnotagreewithobservedanisotropiesin e+e− events.
Onesolutionistoallow g→qq+qqbranchesinthefinalstages of the shower. This has been implemented bothfor Herwig and Sherpa, but has now been replaced bythe next approach inHerwig. (The possibility to rear-range three mesonic clusters into two baryonic ones hasalready been mentioned, but is not relevant fore+e−.)Isotropic cluster decays also give too soft charm andbottom hadron spectra ine+e−. Therefore such clusterdecays are treated anisotropically, such that the heavyhadron is preferentially near the heavy-quark direction,when viewed in the cluster rest frame. Some further im-provements can be obtained if also other cluster decayspreferentially favor hadrons closer to the cluster endwith the matching flavor.
There may be a small fraction where the clustermass is not large enough to produce two hadrons withthe required flavor content. In such cases the cluster canbe allowed to collapse into a single hadron, with excessfour-momentum shuffled to another nearby cluster. Forheavy quarks one may also allow some such collapsesabove the two-body threshold, to further harden theheavy-hadron spectrum.
Furtherproceduresexistbothin Herwig andSherpato handle other special cases.
11.4.8 Decays, rescattering and Bose–EinsteinMany of the primary produced hadrons are unstableand decay further. Often the decay channels and theirbranching ratios are well-known, but for charm andespecially bottom hadrons the picture is incomplete.
Higher resonances are poorly known also in the light-quark sector. Furthermore, inclusive measurements of agiven final state may need to be translated into a poten-tial sequence of intermediate states,e.g. Kππ may re-ceive contributions fromρandK∗ resonances. Once thedecay sequence has been settled, angular correlations inthe decays should be considered, where feasible. Espe-cially for bottom theEvtgen package provides a largeselection of relevant matrix elements, as doesTauolafor τ lepton decay. The standard event generators alsohandle such nonisotropic decays to a varying degree.
The main pp generators assume that particles arefree-streamingonceformed.Thisisnotthecaseinheavy-ion collisions, where the particle density remains high awhile after the hadronization stage, and hadrons there-fore can rescatter against each other. Studies show thatalso pp collisions are affected by rescattering, but notto a dramatic degree.
AnotherissueisBose–Einstein(orFermi–Dirac)cor-relations, present in the production of identical bosons(or fermions). Empirically this results in an enhance-ment (or depletion) of nearby pairs. Typical deducedemission source sizes range from somewhat below 1 fmin e+e− to somewhat above that for pp. Such scalesobviously overlap with the hadronization ones, but alsowith the decays of short-lived resonances such asρ, and408 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYwith hadronic rescattering. The modelling therefore isfar from trivial, and no traditional generator includesBose–Einstein effects by default.
11.4.9 Other collision typesWhile the emphasis of the description above has beenon the three mainppgenerators at LHC, a few words onadjacent fields and other generators are in place [3560].
Many of these other programs do not address hardphysics, but are intended to describe inclusive eventsdominated by low-pT QCD processes. Via an MPI ma-chinery they may or may not contain a tail of harderQCD events.
Fields that can be covered by thee+e−/pp genera-tors include Deeply Inelastic Scattering and photopro-duction inep or µp. The latter is largely based on theconcept of Vector Meson Dominance (VMD),i.e. thata real photon can fluctuate into a vector meson state.
The transition between the two regions of photon virtu-alities remains less easily modelled. The VMD picturecan also be usede.g. for ultraperipheralγγ collisions inheavy-ion beams. Work remains to extend theep col-lision framework toeA, as required for the simulationEIC physics.
Generatorsforheavy-ionphysicsspanabroadrange.
In one extreme models introduce nuclear geometry andmultiple pp/pn/nn collisions, but with each collisionsimilar to a regularpp one, up to energy–momentumconservation effects and the like. The earliest such ex-ample isFritiof, theAngantyr descendant of whichis now included inPythia. Others areSibyll, Qgsjetand Dpmjet. Such models can be run reasonably fast,and the latter three therefore are commonly used forthe hadronic part of cosmic-ray cascades in the atmo-sphere.
In the other extreme the formation and evolution ofa quark–gluon plasma (QGP) is the key feature. Thisrequires the combination of models for several stagesof the evolution, notably the hydrodynamical evolu-tion of the plasma, which can be quite time-consuming.
Jetscape offers a common framework where modelsfor the different stages can be combined at will.
Asuccessfulintermediateprogramisthecore–coronaEPOS one [3580]. In it, peripheralpp/pn/nn collisions(corona) occur more-or-less separated from each other,while the central higher-density core region may forma QGP, which then decays to hadrons according to astatistical model. The core QGP component gains inrelative importance when going frompp to pA to AA,and from peripheral to central collisions. This gives abehaviour largely consistent with data.
Finally, generators for neutrino physics, likeGenie,are largely separate from the ones above, in that anemphasisliesoninteractionswithnucleiatlowenergies.
The separation into a primary physics process followedby a simulation of detector effects thereby is blurred.
11.4.10 StandardizationThe main generators discussed here largely are separatecodes. This allows for cross-checks where results shouldagree, and a spread of predictions where the physics isnot well-specified. Comparisons are greatly simplifiedby common standards.
The oldest standard is the PDG particle numberingscheme, whereby observed and postulated particles areassigned unique integer numbers.
Thetransferofinformationfrommatrix-elementgen-erators to general-purpose generators is defined in theLes Houches Accord (LHA), and the associated LesHouches Event File (LHEF) [3581]. It specifies in par-ticular a listing of all incoming and outgoing partonsof a hard interaction, with their four-momenta. Exten-sions include multiple event weights to represent scaleand PDF variations.
The transfer of the much bigger complete eventsfrom generators to detector simulation, or straight tousers, is handled by theHepMC standard [3582]. AgainPDG particle codes and four-momenta provide the ba-sic information. Also the step-by-step event history isdocumented,butcannotbemadecompletelygenerator-independentsincedifferentphysicsisinvolved, e.g. stringsversus clusters.
Parton distributions are widely used in generators,for hard interactions, MPIs and ISR. Today each newPDF set typically consists in the order of a hundredmembers, to provide a representation of the correlateduncertainties. Each member is stored as a file with thePDF value of all relevant partons in a grid in(x,Q)space. LHAPDF [3583] specifies the file format, suchthat common interpolation routines can be used for thePDF evaluation for arbitraryx and Q values.
A major issue in the interpretation of data, not leastfor generator development and tuning, is the difficultyto reproduce all the methods and cuts used in the anal-ysis, even after the data has been corrected for detec-tor inefficiencies and smearing. Here theRivet frame-work [3584] allows a standardized way for experimentsto submit a code that takes generated (HepMC) eventsand analyzes them in such a way that the output canbe directly compared with published data.11.5 Jet reconstruction 40911.4.11 The futureBefore the start of the LHC, we believed to have a fairunderstandingofthephysicsathigh-energy e+e−/pp/ppcolliders. The hadronization description developed inthe light of PETRA worked surprisingly well also atLEP. By jet universality — the assumption that thesame hadronization mechanisms are at play in differentcollision types — the same should hold also for hadroncolliders,whenextendedbyaspectssuchasmultipartoninteractions and color reconnection.
The shock of LHC then was that high-multiplicityppevents were shown to behave surprisingly like heavy-ion collisions, with strangeness and baryon enhance-ment, both in the light-quark and in the charm/bot-tom sectors, and signs of collective flow such as ridgeeffects. From what we have been able to learn so far,it seems that high-pT physics remains unaffected, suchthat there perturbation theory still can be reliably com-binedwithLEP-tunedhadronizationmodels.Thismakessense, in that partons in that region mainly evolve ina vacuum. But, at lowpT, we already knew that themultiparton interactions lead to a close-packing of frag-menting systems, whether strings or clusters. We justhadnotfullyappreciateditsconsequences,inpartlulledby the common belief in the heavy-ion community thattime scales inpp collisions are too short for a quark–gluon plasma to form. Now we are in the process ofrethinking hadronization. One approach is the core–corona one, where a core part of thepp event indeedbehaves like a plasma, while the corona part does not.
The alternative is to avoid the plama and introduceother possible mechanisms, such as junctions, ropes andshove. While some progress has been made, still nosuch coherent alternative exists. Anyway, the bottomline is that LHC has reinvigorated the study of thesoft-physics aspects of event generators, in addition toobviously driving the hard-physics evolution, see Sec-tion 11.3.
While there is still much more to be learned fromthe LHC, attention is also turning to other future col-liders. The one that may require most new generatordevelopment is the EIC, since it involves new physicsscenarios not addressed before.
11.5 Jet reconstructionBogdan Malaescu, Dag GillbergSteven Schramm, and Chris Y oungA QCD interaction at a very high energy, such as thehard process of an LHC collision, produces quarks andgluons that are asymptotically free at very short dis-tances, but often result in a final state of hundreds ofparticles at the distance scales of detectors (>1mm).
It is highly desirable to reduce the complexity of thehadronic final state and map it onto a representationthat mimics the kinematics of the short-distance hardprocess. This is the goal of jet algorithms . Jet algo-rithms are a set of rules used to group directionallynearbyparticlestoformjets.Ajetcanhencebethoughtof as a collimated group of particles that might corre-spond to a high energy parton of the hard process. Theparticles used as input to form jets can be of severaltypes: a set of partons, a consistent set of hadrons, ora set of detector objects such as reconstructed charged-particle tracks or localized calorimeter energy measure-ments.
11.5.1 Jet algorithmsThere are a number of desirable features for a jet al-gorithm. It should be computationally robust and wellspecified, ideally with few parameters. It should be the-oretically well behaved, and exhibit bothinfrared andcollinear safety. The former refers to adding one or sev-eral particles with infinitesimal energy, and the latter tosplit any input particle into two. For both these kindsof alterations of the input particles, the resulting jetfour-momenta will be identical if the jet algorithm issafe against said effects. The jet algorithm should fur-ther behave equivalently at different orders of the QCDevolution: at the parton, hadron and detector levels.
Furthermore, it should not be tailored to a specific de-tector, but be useful and used both by theorists and byexperimental collaborations.
One of the early jet algorithms was the SnowmassCone Algorithm of 1990 [3585]. This algorithm, whichused ET and operated in(η,φ)-space106, wrestled withseveral of the issues mentioned above. Complicationarose due to choice of seeds and overlapping cones,which were dealt with by a merging and splitting stageof the jet algorithm, and which tried to find ’stablecones’. Similar cone algorithms with various improve-ments were employed by the CDF and DØ collabora-tions at Fermilab [3586, 3587]. The kt algorithm [172]wasdevelopedin1993,inspiredbyQCDsplittingsscales(see Section11.2). The advantages of thekt algorithmarethatithasnosplit/mergestage,andjetsareuniquelydefined; disadvantages include the irregular jet shapes,andthedifficultytoexperimentallyreconstructandcal-ibrate the jets.
106 ET ≡ E sin(θ) and the pseudorapidity η =−ln(tan(θ/2)), whereθ is the angle to the beam pipe.410 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGY10210 [GeV]Tp Jet 4−3 −2 −1 −0 1 2 3 4 yRapidity 3−2−1−0123φAzimuth Hbb+Wdu = 13.6 TeVs, bbqq → WH → pp > 25 GeV Tp = 0.4, R jets, tkHard scatterStable particlesneutral − + = 60µPileup neutral ± > 1.0 GeVptclTp10210 [GeV]Tp Jet 4−3 −2 −1 −0 1 2 3 4 yRapidity 3−2−1−0123φAzimuth Hbb+Wdu = 13.6 TeVs, bbqq → WH → pp > 25 GeV Tp = 0.4, R jets, tkAnti-10210 [GeV]Tp Jet 4−3 −2 −1 −0 1 2 3 4 yRapidity 3−2−1−0123φAzimuth Hbb+Wdu = 13.6 TeVs, bbqq → WH → pp > 25 GeV Tp = 0.4, RCambridge-Aachen jets, 10210310 [GeV]Tp Jet 4−3 −2 −1 −0 1 2 3 4 yRapidity 3−2−1−0123φAzimuth Hbb+Wdu = 13.6 TeVs, bbqq → WH → pp > 25 GeV Tp = 1.0, R jets, tkAnti-Fig. 11.5.1The same simulatedpp→ W+H → u¯db¯bevent, reconstructed with four different jet algorithms:kt (top left), anti-kt(top right) and Cambridge-Aachen (bottom left), all with radius parameterR = 0 .4, and anti-kt with R = 1 .0 (bottom right).
The hard process particles are shown as black markers, while the final set of stable particles are displayed as crosses. Particlesfrom pileup interactions, generated using a mean ofµ= 60 inelastic ppcollisions, are shown as grey open markers. Particles withpT < 1 GeV are not displayed. The solid colored areas show the extension (catchment area) of each jet withpT > 25 GeV, andtheir colors indicate the jetpT. The code needed to produce this plot is available as the example programmain95 in recentPythiadistributions.
Today, the most common method to build jets is theanti-kt algorithm [174], defined very similarly to thektalgorithm. Both algorithms start from a set of particles,each with associated four-momenta, and the followingdistance measures are calculateddij = min(p2pT,i,p2pT,j)∆R2ijR2 , d iB = p2pT,i, (11.5.1)where R is a radius parameter,∆R2ij = ∆y2ij + ∆φ2ij isthe distance squared in(y,φ)-space between particlesiand j, and the parameterp is 1 for thekt algorithm,0 for the Cambridge-Aachen [170] algorithm and −1for the anti-kt algorithm. The distancedij is calculatedfor all combinations of pairs of particles, anddiB onceper particle. The smallest distance is found; if this isa diB value, then particlei will define a jet. If it is adij value, then particlesi and j are merged, normallyby four-momentum addition (pk = pi + pj). In bothcases, the list of particles and the associated distancesare updated, and the algorithm proceeds with one lessparticle per iteration until all particles have been used.
When finished, each input particle is uniquely part of ajet. An illustration of the produced jets for these threekt-style jet algorithms is presented in Fig.11.5.1, wherethe jets are built for stable particles produced by a sim-ulated pp →W+H →u¯db¯b event at the LHC with apileup contribution corresponding to a mean number ofinelastic pp interactions ofµ= 60.
As is clear from Fig11.5.1, jets do not provide aunique interpretation of any given event, rather theyare a tool that can be optimized to best address theneeds of a given task. Even if jet algorithms are in-tended to represent the underlying hard process of agiven collision, the variety of possible hard processesnecessitates the consideration of different jet algorithmconfigurations. In other words, a jet algorithm definesan event organization concept and it can be adaptedfor different physics processes.11.5 Jet reconstruction 411 (GeV)Tp2030 100 200 1000 2000 Jet energy fraction00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91 (8 TeV) CMSSimulation restµe, (rest)γ)0π (γΛLKSKnnpp±Σ-K+K-π+πPythia 6 Z2\*Fig. 11.5.2The fraction of the total jet energy carried by dif-ferent types of particles of particle-level jets produced in simu-lated LHC dijet events. Particle-level jets are built from parti-cles (cτ >10 mm). The ratio of charged-to-neutral pions is 2:1due to isospin symmetry, while for baryons it is 1:1; the overallcharged-to-neutral fraction of particles in a jet roughly averagesbetween these two expectations. [3588]The most common usage of jets in the collider con-text is to represent the collimated group of final stateparticles originating from individual quarks or gluons ofthe hard scatter. For this task, the preferred jet radiusparameter has slightly changed during the last decades.
Values ofR= 0.6 or 0.7 have often been used for stud-ies of events with well separated jets (e.g. dijet produc-tion), while smaller radii (0.4 or 0.5) are more appropri-atetoresolvemorecomplexfinalstates,suchas t¯tortheexample shown in Fig.11.5.1. As is further discussed inSection 11.5.2, smaller radii makes jets less susceptibletopileup,whichhasbecomeanimportantconsiderationat the LHC. Since the start of LHC Run 2, the anti-ktalgorithm with a radius parameter ofR= 0.4 has beenthestandardchoicelargelyduetothesereasons.There-sulting jets are then interpreted as a set of quark- andgluon-initiated showers. Such jets are primarily com-posed of charged and neutral pions, but baryons andother types of mesons contribute a moderate fractionof the total jet energy, as shown in Fig.11.5.2. Smallenergy fractions of electrons and muons can also be seenthat originate from semi-leptonic heavy hadron decays.
A natural second-level question relating to such jetsis to determine their underlying production mechanism.
Is a given jet produced by a light-flavor quark (u/d/s),a gluon, a heavy-flavor quark (cor b), or by some otherprocess? Heavy-flavor jets are typically easier to defineat all levels: they can be identified by whether or notthe list of constituents the jet is composed of containsbor cquarks at parton-level;B or D hadrons (or theirdecay products) at particle-level; or, have associatedcharge-particle tracks originating from collision-point-displaced vertices at the experimental level. The dif-ference between light-flavor-quark- and gluon-initiatedshowers is more subtle, and is not rigorously defined forparticle- or experiment-level jets. Instead, the expectedproperties of quarks and gluons can be used to differen-tiate between such jets on average, noting that quarkshave a single color charge and are thus expected to ra-diate less, resulting in more narrow showers containingfewer constituents than showers produced by gluons.
Another important concept, and which is of greatrelevance at the LHC, is to use jets to represent com-plex energy flow processes rather than individual show-ers. The high energy collisions at the LHC can resultin the production of massive particles, such asW, Zand H bosons and top quarks, with high transverse mo-mentum. Therefore they have a sizable Lorentz boost inthe rest frame of the detector, and their decay productswill be collimated. In the case of hadronic decay prod-ucts, each daughter particle further produces showers ofhadrons, which can overlap. Rather than reconstructingthis complex structure of overlapping hadronic showersas separate jets, the entire decay of the massive particlecan be treated as a single jet, and properties of that jetcan be used to infer the nature of the originating parti-cle [3589]. In such a scenario, it is useful to increase thedistance parameter used to build jets to contain the en-tire hadronic decay, as shown for the anti-kt algorithmwith R = 1 .0 in the bottom right plot in Fig.11.5.1where the W boson decay is within a single jet, whilethe H boson decay is split between two jets. The col-limation of the decay particles is related to the massand momentum of the parent particle; for a two-bodydecay, this becomes:∆R≳ 2 mparentpparentT, (11.5.2)where ∆R is the angular separation between the de-cay products in(y,φ)-space. From this equation, it isclear that increased collision energies producing higher-momentum massive particles will result in increasinglycollimated decays, and thus the importance of using alarger value ofR to represent a complex energy flow isrelated to the energy scale of the process under study.
Jets built with this context in mind are typically re-ferred to as large-radius or large-R jets, where typicalmodern values are R = 0 .8 for CMS or R = 1 .0 forATLAS; this is in contrast to the previously discussedR = 0 .4 jets, which are referred to as small-radius orsmall-R jets.412 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYUsing a larger distance parameter comes with sev-eral complications, both experimental and theoretical.
From the purely algorithmic perspective, one challengeis that the catchment area [3590] of an individual jetgrows dramatically, as clearly visible when comparingthe top right and bottom right plots in Fig. 11.5.1.
Among other effects, this increases the amount of en-ergyfromtheunderlyingeventincludedinthejet,whichcan hide the features of interest: for example, the massof the jet should peak at the mass of the parent parti-cle, but this is not the case due to the presence of theunderlying event. This can be mitigated through theuse of a variety of different grooming algorithms [3589,3591–3594]. These algorithms are typically applied af-ter building the initial jets. The objects clustered intothe jet are then subject to a further selection, and thosewhich appear to be inconsistent with originating from ahard-scattering process are removed, thus suppressingthe underlying event and other undesired contributionswhile retaining the physics features of interest.
11.5.2 Jet reconstructionInputs to jet reconstruction:Particle-level jets, often referred to as truth jets , areused as a theoretical reference for experimental mea-surements. These are jets built from stable particles ,defined as those with lifetimeτ such thatcτ >10 mm(τ >33 ps), which can be thought of as “what a per-fect detector would see’’. It should be noted that neu-tral pions are not considered stable and hence their de-cay products (photons) will be used as input to truthjets (see Fig. 11.5.2). Only particles produced in theproton–proton interaction of interest are considered.
These jets also form the reference for the calibrationof reconstructed jets.
Experimental reconstruction of jets requires the def-inition of a given set of inputs, which will ideally repre-sent the true particles of the jet or the energy flow. Asjets consist of both charged and neutral hadrons, thesimplest reconstruction makes use of the energy flowcaptured in a calorimeter, which measures the energyof both charged and neutral incident particles. How-ever, as we will see in this section, the accuracy ofjet reconstruction can be improved through the use ofadditional information from tracks reconstructed fromcharged particles.
At a hadron collider such as the LHC, a wide rangeof energies of jets need to be accurately reconstructed:from 20 GeV to above 4 TeV inpT. This representsa significant challenge for the design of the detectors.
Both ATLAS and CMS surround the interaction pointwith a tracking detector immersed in a magnetic field,such that the momentum of charged particles can bemeasured. Around this are the calorimeters. The in-nermost calorimeters are designed to reconstruct elec-tromagnetically showering particles, such as electronsand photons, and will also capture some energy fromcharged and neutral hadrons. Radially outward of thesedetectors are hadronic calorimeters that measure theenergy of showers from remaining charged and neutralhadrons.
An additional complication at the LHC ispileup.
Each time two bunches of protons cross, multiple pairsof protons can collide. This is referred to as in-timepileup. The beam-spot, the region of interactions, istypically 30–50mm in length along the beam direction.
This means that such collisions are typically separatedin this dimension and tracks originating from differentcollisions can be identified. A second effect is out-of-time pileup. The bunches of protons cross every 25nsin the LHC, therefore there are still residual effects inmany of the detectors from the previous (and subse-quent for some systems with large integration times)bunch crossings. These residual signals are referred toas out-of-time pileup.
Throughout Run 1 of the LHC (2010–2012), ATLASused solely calorimeter inputs to build their jets. TheATLAS calorimeters consist of over 100,000 cells. Thisfine cell granularity is used to suppress noise by con-structing clusters of cells, which represent the energyflow. Cells with energy significantly greater than the ex-pected background noise are used to seed such clusters,and adjacent cells are added iteratively, forming topo-logicallyconnectedclustersrepresentingashower[ 3595].
This process means that most cells in the calorime-ter are not included in the event reconstruction, andhence their noise does not contribute to the jet resolu-tion. As the calorimeters are non-compensating, show-ers caused by electromagnetically and hadronically in-teracting particles of identical initial energies have dif-ferent energy responses. The jet resolution can there-fore be improved by identifying which type of showereach cluster contains and calibrating it appropriately.
In ATLAS the energy density of the cluster and its po-sition in the calorimeter are used for classification andsubsequent calibration [3595]. These calibrated clusterswere the input signals to jet reconstruction for ATLASin Run 1.
CMS has employed a particle-flow approach bothin Run 1 and Run 2 [3597], and ATLAS also devel-oped such an approach for Run 2 [3596]. The princi-ple of particle flow is to supplement the informationfrom the calorimeter with tracking information. Bothcollaborations match tracks reconstructed in the inner11.5 Jet reconstruction 413Fig. 11.5.3 The simulated signals from a pT = 30 GeV jetin the (η,φ) plane of the second layer of the ATLAS elec-tromagnetic calorimeter. The shaded cells are those includedin calorimeter topoclusters. Green deposits are from neutralhadrons within the jet, red deposits are from charged hadronswithin the jet, and blue deposits are from pileup particles. Thepurple ∗ represents the tracks of charged hadrons within thejet after being extrapolated to the calorimeter, and the yellow∗ represents tracks from pileup [3596].
detector to calorimeter energy deposits from the sameparticle. The ability to do this depends on the granu-larity of the detector, the small transverse size of theshowers in the calorimeter, and the separation of theparticles. Figure11.5.3 shows how this can be achievedby extrapolating tracks through the magnetic field tothe calorimeter and matching them to calorimeter en-ergy deposits. The CMS algorithm combines the mea-surementsoftracksandmatchedcalorimeter-energyde-positstocreatecombinedreconstructedchargedhadronswith improved resolution. Calorimeter deposits withouttracks are then identified as neutral hadrons. Situationswhere the showers of a charged hadron and a neutralhadron are overlapping are identified by the excess ofenergyinthecalorimeterabovewhatwouldbeexpectedfrom the charged hadron. In ATLAS a choice is madebetween the calorimeter and track reconstruction. ForlowpT tracks, where the track resolution is significantlybetter than that of the calorimeter, the momentummeasurement is taken from the reconstructed track andthe corresponding shower created by that particle is re-moved from the calorimeter. The remaining calorime-ter energy deposits then represent the energy flow fromparticles without tracks and those where the track isnot selected.
Fig. 11.5.4The jet resolution in the central region of the CMSdetector when jets are reconstructed using calorimeter signals(Calo) or particle flow objects (PF). The simulated QCD eventshave√s= 13 TeVandthere areno pileupeffectspresent[ 3597].
Both collaborations see significant improvements inthe pT and angular resolutions of jets reconstructed us-ing particle flow. Fig. 11.5.4 shows the dramatic im-provement in the energy resolution in CMS. In ATLASthe improvement is smaller, and primarily at lowerpT,due to the superior calorimeter resolution. However, thegains from the use of particle flow increase at higherpileup motivating its use in Run 2 and beyond.
Jet algorithms in the experimental context:Having reconstructed either clusters or a set of particleflow objects, the jet algorithms featured in Sec.11.5.1can be used to build jets. A key advantage of usingparticle flow objects is that prior to building the jets,charged particles that are from in-time pileup inter-actions can be excluded. This is known as ChargedHadron Subtraction, and is performed by both exper-iments’ particle flow algorithms [3596, 3597]. This re-moves the majority of the effects of charged pileup par-ticles but the effects due to neutral pileup particlesand out-of-time pileup remain. This explains why AT-LAS observes increasing benefits of the particle flowapproach at higher pileup. Additionally CMS employsPUPPI [3598] which uses the local information to try toidentify neutral pileup energy deposits and weight theseto lower significance prior to jet finding [3598, 3599].
Some small-R jets reconstructed from either calori-meter or particle flow inputs will consist of only signalsfrom pileup particles. These are referred to as pileup414 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGYjets and can be the result of QCD jets from other in-time collisions, multiple particles from different in-timecollisions, out-of-time pileup signals, or a combinationof several of these effects. These jets will not have trackspointing at them from the interaction vertex of interest,while they will in some cases have tracks from othervertices. These features are used by both ATLAS andCMS to reject such jets such that they are not used inanalyses [3599, 3600].
Large-radiusjetsaremuchmoresusceptibletopileup,due to their larger catchment area. Most large-radiusjets at the LHC will therefore contain a mixture of en-ergy originating from multiple collisions (either in-timeor out-of-time), and thus it is impractical to reject en-tire jets. Moreover, large-radius jet are typically usedin situations where the internal structure of the largeradius jet is of interest, and thus any constituents origi-nating from other processes than the hard-scatter inter-action must be suppressed to observe the jet’s internalstructure. Charged hadron subtraction, from particleflow algorithms, can help to remove charged contribu-tions for separate collisions, but alternative strategiesareneededtoremoveoverlappingneutralcontributions.
Grooming algorithms, previously motivated in the con-text of suppressing underlying event contributions, arealso useful in this context: the same criteria of sup-pressing soft and wide-angle radiation is also useful formitigating pileup contributions. These grooming algo-rithms are applied after the jet is built, but the inputsto jet algorithms can also be corrected; various criteriacan be used to suppress neutral jet inputs from verticesother than the one of interest, such as Constituent Sub-traction (CS) [3601], Soft Killer (SK) [3602], PUPPI, orcombinations thereof such as CS+SK. Currently, AT-LASmakesuseofCS+SKtomodifytheinputstolarge-radius jet reconstruction [3603], while CMS makes useof PUPPI [3604].
11.5.3 Jet calibrationEnergy scale and resolution:Once jets are reconstructed, they need to be calibratedsuchthatonaveragethereconstructedjetfour-momentamatch those at the particle level within the assigneduncertainties. At hadron colliders, the jet energy-scale(JES) calibration-correction is typically applied in asequence of steps. Those account for (the mitigationof) contributions from additional proton–proton colli-sions, energy losses in the dead material of the detector,calorimeter non-compensation (where applicable), an-gular biases, etc. Several of these calibration steps relyon a detailed Monte Carlo simulation (MC) of detectorrefT/pjetTp0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5050100150200250300350< 80 GeVrefT60 < pATLASanti-kt R= 0.4, EM+JESZ+jet DB, Data 2012<0.8jetη det-120 fb= 8 TeV,sEvents / 0.025Fig. 11.5.5 Distributions ofpjetT /prefT in Z+jet events, whereprefT is defined by the reconstructedZ boson pT and is requiredtobeintherange (60,80) GeV.Thedashedlineshowsthefitteddistribution, from which the means are taken as the responsemeasurements. The solid line indicates the fitting ranges. Themarkers are the data counts with error bars corresponding tothe statistical uncertainties. Figure from Ref. [3605].
effects. Modern techniques use jet and event properties(e.g. jet area, jet width, fraction of energy in the var-ious layers of the calorimeters, averagepT density) toimprove resolution and to mitigate the dependence ofthe JES response on the jet flavor. The latter are siz-able mainly at low jet transverse momentum (pT) andyield one of the main modeling uncertainties impactingthe JES calibration.
The calibration chain is completed byin-situ cor-rections that are most commonly derived by exploitingmomentumbalancebetweenjetsandwell-measuredref-erence objects. Selection criteria are applied to suppressextra radiation and obtain a sample of events where aprobe jet is back-to-back with the reference object. Acorrection is then derived by comparing the measuredbalance in data relative to the expectations of MC sim-ulation, and correcting for the residual difference:(pjetT /prefT)data / (pjetT /prefT)MC. (11.5.3)Thisprinciplewasdevelopedforthecalibrationofsmall-radius (R ∈[0.4,0.7]) jets [3588, 3605, 3606] and hasnow also been used for large-radius jets [3607].
These in-situ methods employ, as reference objects,photons, Z bosons decaying to charged leptons, andone or several pre-calibrated jets. Fig.11.5.5 presentsan example ofpjetT /prefT distribution in data, the meanof which is used to derive the jet calibration. They alsoprovide the main uncertainties impacting the JES cali-bration,reachingnowadayssub-percentprecisionacrossa broad phase-space, while being larger for relatively11.5 Jet reconstruction 415low-andlarge- pT jets,aswellasintheforwardregionofthe detectors. While for large-pT jets these approachesare limited by the available statistics, for low-pT andforward jets they are limited by modeling effects, re-lated to e.g. the emission of extra radiation impact-ing thepT balance. The use ofin-situ techniques haveallowed for significant improvements in precision com-pared to jet calibrations based on test-beam studies.
The latter are still used in phase-space regions with lit-tle/no statistics coverage for thein-situ approaches.
Statistical combinations, with a full propagation ofuncertainties and correlations, are generally employedand yield the necessary inputs for physics analyses. Inthese studies, uncertainties on the uncertainties andon the correlations have also been evaluated (see e.g.
Ref. [3608]). This is an example where QCD studiestrigger developments that set new standards on a topicof interest in other scientific areas too.
The width of thepjetT /prefT distributions, such as theoneexemplifiedinFig. 11.5.5,providesinformationaboutthe jet energy resolution (JER). Indeed, the JER is de-termined in variouspjetT ranges and detector regions, af-ter subtracting statistically the smearing effect inducedby the presence of extra radiation in the events. After-wards, a statistical combination of severalin-situ meth-ods through a fit allows for the extraction of a param-eterization of the JER in data, together with its uncer-tainties, readily usable in physics analyses accountingfor detector smearing effects.
Mass scale and resolution:To first order, calibrations derived to correct the en-ergy of a jet are also important to use when correctingthe mass of a jet, as these two quantities are related.
However, the mass calculation includes both energy andangular components, and thus the jet mass must befurther corrected after the energy has been addressed.
Similarly to the energy, calibrating the mass of a jetbegins with corrections based on simulated samples, tocorrect the average simulated jet mass to the particle-level scale. In the context of large-radius jets, it is veryimportant to apply the same grooming algorithms tothe truth jets and the reconstructed jets, as the groom-ing algorithm has a substantial impact on the mass ofthe jet built from particles, primarily due to the sup-pression of the underlying event contributions.
Followingthesesimulation-basedcorrections,there-sulting mass must be compared between data and sim-ulation, but the strategies to evaluate differences be-tween data and simulation necessarily differ. The jetenergy corrections exploited the conservation of mo-mentum in the transverse frame through the balanceEvents / 5 GeV0200400600800ATLAS-1 = 13 TeV, 36.2 fbstk = 1.0 anti-RTrimmed LCW+JES+JMS| < 2.0detη + jets, |µ → tt 1000 GeV≤ Tp350 GeV < R(b; jet) < 1Δb-jet tag: DatattSingle topW+jetsOtherMC syst. errorCalorimeter jet mass [GeV]050 100 150 200 250 300 350 Data / MC0.511.522.5Fig.11.5.6 Themassoflarge-radiusjetsinafinalstatetarget-ing semi-leptonic decays oft¯tevents, where ab-tagged jet over-laps with the large-radius jet. This selection primarily identifieslarge-radius jets containing the decays of boosted top quarks,as is clear from the dominant peak structure consistent with thet¯tsimulation expectation. Differences between data and simula-tion in both the jet mass scale and resolution can be extractedfrom such a plot. [3607]between probe and reference objects to obtain a precisecalibration. There is no equivalent conservation law forjet mass, so a different approach is needed. Instead, themass has a well-defined expectation value in specificcases, notably if a pure sample ofW, Z or H bosons ortop quarks can be obtained.W bosons and top quarksare the easiest particles to identify in this context: semi-leptonic t¯t events provide an ideal means of identify-ing a high-purity selection of hadronically decaying topquarks, and the distinction between a full top decayand aW boson decay can be made by requiring theb-quark from the top decay to be either inside or outsideof the large-radius jet of interest. The resulting high-purity selection ofW bosons or top quarks can be com-pared between data and simulated events, where differ-ences in the mass peak’s central value (mass scale) andwidth (mass resolution) can be evaluated and correctedfor; an example of the top quark selection is shown inFig. 11.5.6, where it is clear that the selected events arevery pure in the signal of interest.
This approach works well, but is limited to onlya few possible jet mass values where we have a well-definedStandardModelexpectation.Correctingthescaleand resolution for other mass values is a much morecomplex task, and a robust, high-precision method toprovide a general mass correction remains an open chal-lenge.416 11 QCD AT HIGH ENERGY11.5.4 Classifying hadronic decays of massive par-ticlesThe use of large-radius jets is overwhelmingly linkedto the desire to represent the entire hadronic decayof a massive particle, such as (but not limited to) aW/Z/H boson or a top quark. If the jet does containall of the daughter particles and their correspondingshowers, then the mass of the jet now has a well-definedprior, namely the mass of the parent particle. This priorholds so long as the large-radius jet represents only theprocess of interest: underlying event and pile-up contri-butions falling within the jet’s catchment area can bothobscure the internal structure of the jet, and must thusbe mitigated, as previously discussed. The mass thenbecomes an excellent means of classifying jets based onthe parent particle that they originate from.
While the jet mass provides a robust means of dif-ferentiating between different possible sources of large-radius jets, in many cases it is not sufficient, as lightquarks and gluons from QCD multijet processes areproduced in extreme abundance compared to the mas-sive particle decays of interest. The mass distributionof light quarks and gluons is peaked at low values, wellbelow theW/Z/H boson or top quark masses, but thetailofthemassdistributionextendstohighmasses,andthese tails are still more probable than the productionof the target massive particles.
Additional jet properties can be used to further clas-sify the origin of a given large-radius jet. These proper-ties are referred to asjet substructure variables and aredesigned to quantify the internal angular energy struc-ture of a jet. Substructure variables are almost alwayscorrelated with the jet mass, and thus it is importantto identify variables that are sufficiently distinct to pro-vide further separation power. One commonly used ex-ample is the N-subjettiness ratios,τxy = τx/τy, whereτn is a projection of the constituents of a jet alongnaxes, thereby evaluating the consistency of the jet con-taining nor fewer decay particles. As an example,τ32 iscommonly used to identify jets containing top quarks,as it differentiates 3-body decays from 2-or-fewer-bodydecays, as shown in Fig.11.5.7. This is only one exam-ple out of the many different types of jet substructurevariables that have been used to complement the jetmass in classifying the origin of large-radius jets.
While the jet mass and substructure variables pro-vide a solid baseline, modern large-radius jet classifiersmake use of machine learning techniques to maximallydiscriminate between different possible jet origin inter-pretations. There is a wide variety of machine-learning-based classifiers in use by both the ATLAS and CMSCollaborations,andtheycontinuetobecomemorepow-wta32τ0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9Normalized amplitude00.010.020.030.040.050.06 ATLAS Simulation = 13 TeVs = 1.0 jetsR tkTrimmed anti- = [500, 1000] GeVtrueTp| < 2trueη| > 60 GeVcombm JetsWmultijetsTop JetsFig. 11.5.7 The N-subjettiness ratio τ32, with the winnertakes all (wta) axis definition [Bertolini:2013iqa], showingthe separation of jets containing three-body decays (top jets)against jets containing either two-body decays (W jets) or indi-vidual quarks/gluons (multijets). This is after a selection crite-rion is applied on the jet mass, and thus the separation shownbetween the three jet types provides additional classificationpower. [3609].
erful; a comparison of several such algorithms as usedby CMS is provided in Fig.11.5.8.
Similar to the jet energy and mass calibrations, thedifference between data and simulation must also bequantified when classifying the origins of large-radiusjets. The algorithms used are usually optimized usingsimulated events, and there is no guarantee that thesimulation properly describes the data, especially forthecomplexangularenergystructurewithinajet,whichis what such classifiers rely upon to differentiate be-tween different jet categories. Similar to the jet massscale calibration, semi-leptonict¯t events provide a use-ful signal-enriched region to evaluate the performanceof bothW boson and top quark classifiers in simulationand data; other signal categories remain more challeng-ing, as we do not yet have sufficiently signal-pure re-gions to perform similar comparisons. In contrast, com-paring the differences between data and simulation forthe misidentified background events is straightforward,as the QCD multijet and γ+jet processes have suchlarge cross sections that they are highly backgroundenriched by default. Any differences between data andsimulation in the fraction of background events passinga given large-radius jet classifier can thus be evaluatedusing these two processes.