4.1 Lattice field theory 51Finally, it is important to mention that the recentyears have seen remarkable advances in the determina-tion ofαs(M2Z) from lattice calculations, also thanks tothe the FLAG effort which imposes strict quality cri-teria for lattice determinations to be included in theFLAG average. This is now the single most precise re-sult of all categories included in the PDG and agreesremarkably well (both in terms of central value and un-certainty) with the PDG world average ofαs withoutlattice data. Further improvements from lattice calcu-lations are also expected in the coming decade. Givenall the progress to be expected in the coming years invarious aspects and categories, a determination ofαswith sub-percent precision seems finally within reach.
4 Lattice QCDConveners:Kostas Orginos and F ranz GrossIn 1974, shortly after Quantum Chromodynamics wasestablished, Kenneth Wilson published a seminal pa-per in which he formulated the theory on a space-timelattice. This formulation had profound implications. Itpreserved the gauge invariance of the theory while regu-lating ultraviolet divergences and providing a definitionof QCD as the continuum limit of the lattice theory.
However, one may argue that the most crucial impli-cation was the fact that it offered a pathway to non-perturbativecomputations.Quantitiessuchasthespec-trum of stable hadrons, decay constants, and Partondistribution functions to name a few, could now in prin-ciple be computed from the fundamental theory with-out the need for uncontrolled approximations. In thebeginning, however, this formulation of QCD lent itselfto a different type of analytic computations such as thestrong coupling expansion where Wilson showed thatcolor charges are indeed confined in the strong couplinglimit.
Numerical investigations of Lattice QCD (LQCD)started a few years later with the pioneering work ofMichael Creutz in 1980. There for the first time, theSU(2) pure Yang-Mills theory was investigated usingMonte Carlo methods. Subsequently, many groups aro-und the world started studying Lattice QCD, developedmethods and algorithms, and investigated the efficacyof the available computer hardware for numerical cal-culations in LQCD. Although the fundamental princi-ples of such calculations were clear, it was evident fromthe beginning that the computational cost for achievingphenomenologically relevant results was enormous. Inaddition, the limitations of Euclidean time formulationas well as the computational limitations imposed by fi-nite volume and lattice spacing made it clear that com-putational power alone will not be enough. Therefore,intense theoretical research to develop methods and al-gorithms started in the ’80s. Together with that effort,many groups devoted efforts to designing custom-madesupercomputers that were best suited for the problemat hand. The idea of a massively parallel computer tosolve scientific problems seemed at odds at the timewith the vector machines that defined the commerciallyavailable high-performance computers. Yet in the ’90sthe rise of massively parallel computers, commercial orcustom-made, led to major advances in LQCD. Thenew century brought a combination of powerful super-computers, sophisticated numerical techniques, and ad-vanced theoretical approaches that allowed for the firsttime to compute physical quantities at phenomenolog-ically relevant accuracy.
Lattice QCD is now an established field that canprovide results at unprecedented accuracy and can helpmove forward our fundamental understanding of parti-cle physics. The impact of lattice QCD computationson strong interaction physics is evident throughout thisvolume.Nearlyeverysectioncontainsreferencestoland-mark lattice QCD computations. In this section, a briefintroduction to the formulation of lattice QCD is givenby Gottlieb, followed by De Tar’s review of the ba-sic LQCD algorithms. Leinweber discusses the struc-ture of the QCD vacuum as it emerges from numericalexperiments. Karsch reviews computations at non-zerotemperatures and densities relevant to understandingquark-gluon plasma physics.
The discussion then continues with a focus on appli-cations. Dudek reviews hadron spectroscopy with em-phasis on finite volume methods that allow for the ex-traction of scattering amplitudes from Euclidean timecorrelationfunctions.Constantinou/Orginosdiscusscom-putationsofthenucleonstructureincludingmodernap-proaches that allow for the extraction of momentum-fraction-dependent distributions from Euclidean timecomputations. Finally, Davies reviews computations forWeak matrix element computations which play a cen-tralroleintheexperimentalprogramforprobingphysicsbeyond the standard model (BSM).
4.1 Lattice field theorySteve Gottlieb4.1.1 IntroductionIn perturbative quantum field theories loop integralslead to infinities. To deal with these infinities, a reg-52 4 LATTICE QCDularization scheme must be introduced. Examples ofregularization schemes are Pauli-Villars modification ofparticle propagators and dimensional regularization inwhich the number of space-time dimensions of the sys-tem becomes a variable. After regularization, calcula-tions no longer suffer from infinities, but they do de-pend on a new parameter specific to the regularizationscheme, e.g.,Λa large mass in the Pauli-Villars scheme,or ϵ = 4 −d in the case of dimensional regularization.
Since physical results should be independent of the reg-ularization scheme, a renormalization procedure is in-troduced so that the so-called bare parameters of thetheory depend on Λ or ϵ in such a way that physicalobservables do not as there is a cancellation betweenthe regularization dependence of the bare parametersand those of the loop integrals.
In lattice field theories (LFTs), the theory is mod-ified so that (in finite volume) there are no longer aninfinite number of degrees of freedom. For instance, ina scalar field theory instead of a real or complex valueof the field at each of the infinite points of space time,there are only a finite number of real or complex de-grees of freedom defined on a hypercubic grid of spacetime points. In this case, the parameter that charac-terizes the regulator is the distance between the spacetime points called the lattice spacing, usually denoteda. Usually, periodic boundary conditions in space andanti-periodic boundary conditions in time are used. Aswe will see in more detail below, the field can be Fouriertransformed and in momentum space there is a maxi-mum momentum as each component of the momentumis in the range−π/a < pi ≤π/a. In a finite volume,there is also a minimum spacing between allowable mo-menta components that serves as an infrared regulator.
To summarize, the lattice field theory regularizes thetheory by introducing a maximum momentum, and therenormalization program is implemented by requiringthat physical quantities be independent of the latticespacing as a →0. Also, since the lattice theory onlyhas hypercubic and not full rotational symmetry, wemust demonstrate that the latter is restored for dis-tances much larger thana.
Actions for a free scalar theoryTo see how LFTs work, let’s start with a free scalar fieldtheory in the continuum, transform it to a Euclideanfield theory and then put it on a lattice. Start with theLagrangian densityL(x) = 12[∂µφ(x)∂µφ(x) −m2φ(x)2] (4.1.1)and the actionS =∫dtL=∫dt∫d3xL(x) (4.1.2)=∫d4x12[∂µφ(x)∂µφ(x) −m2φ(x)2]=∫d4x12[∂tφ(x)∂tφ(x)−∇φ(x) ·∇φ(x) −m2φ(x)2]where φ(x) is the scalar field andm is its mass. TheFeynman path integral is defined asZ =∫[dφ] exp{iS}, (4.1.3)where [dφ] denotes the integration measure of all possi-ble fieldsφ(x). To Euclideanize the theory lett→−iτwhich changes the sign of the time derivative term inthe Lagrangian density. It also adds a factor−ibecauseof the change of integration variable in the action. So,the Euclidean action is defined to beSE =∫d3xdτ12[∂τφ(x)∂τφ(x)+ ∇φ(x) ·∇φ(x) + m2φ(x)2], (4.1.4)and the path integral becomesZ =∫[dφ] exp{−SE}. (4.1.5)At this point, it is traditional to renameτ to t, the timevariable with which we started, or letτ = x4. In anycase, the fieldφ is defined on a 4-dimension Euclideandomain, SE is positive definite, and this looks like apartition function of a statistical mechanical system.
The transformation to Euclidean time allows us to usethe importance sampling techniques of statistical me-chanics (Monte Carlo methods) introduced in the nextsection.
To convert to a lattice theory, introduce a spac-ing a between the points of a hypercubic grid, so thelattice field φn is defined on a discrete set of pointsn= ( n1,n2,n3,n4) in R4 and x= an. Typically, workis done in a finite volume so thatni is an integer be-tween 0 andNi−1, whereNi is the extent of the latticein thei-th direction. The derivatives must be replacedby a finite difference approximation. There is more thanone way to do this. Pretending for the moment thatφdepends only on a single variablex, a forward differenceis defined by∆+φ(x) = φ(x+ a) −φ(x)a . (4.1.6)Taylor expandingφ(x+ a) gives∆+φ(x) = φ′(x) + a2φ′′(x) + ··· . (4.1.7)4.1 Lattice field theory 53Note that the symmetric finite difference operator∆Sφ(x) = φ(x+ a) −φ(x−a)2a (4.1.8)= φ′(x) + a26 φ′′′(x) + ··· (4.1.9)isamuchbetterapproximationofthecontinuumderiva-tive since the correction is second order in the smalllattice spacinga.
Actions for a gauge invariant scalar theory with a φ4-type interactionTo introduce gauge invariance, change the real scalarfield to a complex field, and introduce aφ4-type inter-action termS =∫d4x[∂µφ∗(x)∂µφ(x) −m2φ∗(x)φ(x) (4.1.10)−λ(φ∗(x)φ(x))2]. (4.1.11)A global gauge transformation is just a changeφ →φ′ = ΩφwhereΩiscomplexphasefactor, Ω = exp{iθ},with θ a real number independent ofx. The action isclearly invariant under this gauge transformation since(φ′)∗ = Ω∗φ∗ and for every factor ofΩ coming fromtransforming φ, there is a corresponding factor ofΩ∗from transformingφ∗. A cubic term in the action wouldbreak this gauge invariance.
To generalize to local gauge invariance, allowθ tobecome a function ofx. The mass and interaction termsare clearly still invariant because they only depend onx. However, the first term with derivatives transformsin a non-trivial way.
∂µφ′(x) = ∂µ(Ω(x)φ(x))= ( ∂µΩ(x))φ(x) + Ω(x)(∂µφ(x)) . (4.1.12)To handle the extra term depending on∂µΩ(x), definea covariant derivative Dµ that has the propertyD′µφ′(x) = Ω(x)Dµφ(x), (4.1.13)so that the covariant derivativeDµφ(x) transforms un-der a gauge transformation the same way that φ(x)does.Toaccomplishthis,introduceavectorfield Aµ(x),and define the covariant derivative to beDµ = ∂µ + ieAµ. (4.1.14)Using this definition in (4.1.13) gives the constraint(∂µ + ieA′µ)(Ω(x)φ(x)) = Ω(x)(∂µ + ieAµ)φ(x) .
(4.1.15)Requiring that this hold for any field φ(x) gives thegauge transformation for the fieldAµA′µΩ = ΩAµ + ie∂µΩ. (4.1.16)This derivation has preserved the order of the terms,so that this equation will hold even for non-Abeliantheories in whichΩ is a matrix. Solving forA′µ in thismost general case givesA′µ = ΩAµΩ−1 + ie(∂µΩ)Ω−1. (4.1.17)For the Abelian theory, this reduces toA′µ = Aµ −1e∂µθ. (4.1.18)This all works out very nicely in the continuum the-ory. Wilson’s brilliant insight [80] was to define the lat-tice theory not with variables from the gauge algebra,but with variables that are elements of the gauge group,denotedU(n,m). These are calledlink variables. or par-allel transporters because they allow the comparison ofa field at one point on the lattice with a neighboringpoint in a gauge covariant way. IfU(n,m) is associatedwith the link connecting nearest neighbor pointsnandm, thenU(m,n) = U†(n,m) = U−1(n,m) (4.1.19)where the second identity follows from the fact thatUis a unitary matrix. So, definingUnµ = U(n,n + ˆµ),Eqn. (4.1.19) shows thatU(n+ ˆµ,n) = U†nµ.
We want the productUnµφn+ˆµ to transform under agauge transformation the same way that the field doesat the point n. In other words, under a gauge trans-formation U →U′ and φn →φ′n = Ωnφn, so we musthaveU′nµφ′n+ˆµ = ΩnUnµφn+ˆµ. (4.1.20)Since φ′n+ˆµ = Ωn+ˆµφn+ˆµ, this impliesU′nµ = ΩnUnµΩ−1n+ˆµ. (4.1.21)Hence,theproductsoflinkvariablesalongapathtrans-form as Ωn if the left-most point isn and Ω−1m , if theright-most point ism. With suitable products of linkvariables, we can transport a field as far as we wishand have it transform as a variable that ‘lives’ at theleft-most point in the product.
The differenceUnµφn+ˆµ−φn transforms in a gaugecovariant way, since under a gauge transformation itpicks up a factor ofΩn. The relationship between thegroup elementUnµ and the gauge fieldAµ(x) that takesa value in the Lie algebra isUnµ = Pexp{ie∫ an+aˆµandyνAν(y)}= exp{iea[Aµ(an+ aˆµ/2) + a224∂2µAµ(an+ aˆµ/2)+ ...
]}= 1 + iaeAµ(an+ aˆµ/2) + ... .(4.1.22)54 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.1.1 Top: The two paths that contribute to[Dµ,Dν].
The µ-direction is the horizontal axis, andν is vertical. On theleft, we haveDµDν, on the rightDνDµ Bottom: The links of aplaquette whose lower-left corner is siten, with directions sameas in top figure.
where the lattice spacingais shown explicitly, and it isnatural to relate the link variableU to the (continuum)gauge field at the midpoint of the link. Note that inWilson’s original work, the lattice gauge field variablesare Anµ, i.e., they are labeled by the left-hand site ofthe link.
Having defined the covariant derivative, the fieldstrength tensor can be calculated. In the continuum:Fµν = ie[Dµ,Dν] (4.1.23)where the square brackets denote the commutator. Thisformula also holds in the case of non-Abelian gaugetheory for whichAµ(x) is a matrix in the Lie algebraof the gauge group.
On the lattice, the covariant derivative involves par-allel transport from a neighboring site. Since there aretwo covariant derivatives a field is transported from twosites away:DµDνφn = Unµ(U(n+ˆµ)νφn+ˆµ+ˆν−φn+ˆµ) −Unνφn+ˆν −φn= UnµU(n+ˆµ)νφn+ˆµ+ˆν−Unµφn+ˆµ −Unνφn+ˆν −φn. (4.1.24)The last three terms are symmetric under the inter-change of µ and ν, so only the first term contributesto the commutator. Thus, the field strength tensor isthe difference between the product of the two two-linkpaths connecting sitesnand n+ ˆµ+ ˆν. In one path wemove in theµ direction first and in the other we movein the ν direction first. Also, the field strength tensoris gauge covariant as the common endpoints of the twopaths determine howFnµν transforms:F′nµν = ΩnFnµνΩ−1n+ˆµ+ˆν. (4.1.25)In the continuum the gauge action is proportionalto F2µν, and is gauge invariant. Having just determinedthat Fµν can be expressed in terms of a two-link path,we might expect that a four-link path would yieldF2µν.
It is easy to construct gauge invariant products of links.
If we take the trace of the product of links along anyclosed path, it will be gauge invariant. The only closedfour-link paths are those around the elementary squaresof the lattice. The term plaquette is sometimes used torefer to the elementary squares of a hypercubic lattice.
The plaquette is also used to refer to the product of thefour link matrices around the square, or to the trace ofthis matrix. The context should make clear whether theauthor is referring to a shape, a matrix, or a number.
Here the plaquetteUnµν will be the trace of the productof the four linksUnµν = Tr(UnµU(n+ˆµ)νU†(n+ˆν)µU†nν) (4.1.26)The Wilson plaquette gauge action is defined asSW = 1g2∑n∑µ̸=ν(3 −Re Unµν) . (4.1.27)Actions for fermionsIn the continuum, the free fermion actionSF is givenby:SF =∫d4x¯ψ(x)(iγµ∂µ −m)ψ(x), (4.1.28)where the gamma matrices obey{γµ,γν}= 2 gµν. Go-ingthroughthetransformationtoEuclideanspacetime,we introduce the Euclidean gamma matricesγE4 = γ0andγEi = −iγi.Thesegammamatricesobey {γEµ,γEν }=2δµν. The Euclidean action is given bySEF =∫d4x¯ψ(x)(γEµ∂µ + m)ψ(x). (4.1.29)We simplify notation below by dropping the superscriptE on the Euclidean gamma matrices. To include theinteraction with the gauge field, the ordinary partialderivative in Eq. 4.1.28 is replaced by the covariantderivative. ForSEF, a gauge covariant finite differenceapproximation is used∂µψ(x) → 12a(Unµψn+ˆµ −U†(n−ˆµ)µψn−ˆµ) (4.1.30)4.1 Lattice field theory 55which is the analog of∆S introduced in Eq.4.1.8. Thisaction is called the naive fermion action, and we areabout to see that it suffers from the so-called “fermiondoubling problem.”To explore this, consider the case of a free fermion,sothelinkvariablesmaybereplacedbytheunitmatrix.
Going to momentum space, letψn =∑pe(iap·n)ψ(p). (4.1.31)On the lattice there is maximum value for each momen-tum component because ifapµ = 2π then the exponen-tial will always be always be the same as forpµ = 0 .
Thus, the momentum components can be restricted tobe less than(2π)/a or more symmetrically,−πa  λ.
Otherwise, reject it.
The transition process defined byQ(U′ ←U) is quitegeneral, which makes the algorithm particularly useful.
4.2.4 Molecular dynamicsBy far the most common present-day method for gen-erating the Markov chain uses a “molecular dynamics”method. We illustrate it for a scalar fieldφ with path-integral partition functionZ =∫[dφ] exp[−S(φ)] . (4.2.21)Wepairadummy“momentum” p(n) withthefield φ(n)on each site of the lattice and rewrite the partition func-tion asZ′ =∫[dp][dφ] exp[−p2/2 −S(φ)]. (4.2.22)The momentum integral is trivial and results in an im-material constant factor. We then take a lesson fromclassicalstatisticalmechanicsandobservethatthispar-tition function describes a statistical ensemble of “par-ticles” of unit mass, one per lattice site, and unit tem-perature kT = 1 moving in an interacting “potential”S(φ). The ensemble is microcanonical with total energyEtot = p2/2 + S(φ) . (4.2.23)The Hamilton equations of motion are, as usual,dφ(n)/dτ = p(n) (4.2.24)dp(n)/dτ = −∂S/∂φ(n) , (4.2.25)where τ is a fictitious “Monte Carlo time”. We then ob-serve that if the system is large and the interactions arenontrivial, the classical motion of the system will leadto a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution in the coordinatesφ given byP(φ) ∝exp[−S(φ)] . (4.2.26)In standard practice, one chooses an arbitrary startingfield configuration φ and sets the initial momenta ac-cording to the Gaussian distributionexp[−p2/2]. Usinga numerical integrator, one integrates the equations ofmotion over some time interval∆τ, at which time onesaves an “updated” configurationφi. Thus the Markovchain is defined by the values ofφ at a series of timeintervals or a series of what are called “molecular dy-namics trajectories”.
Refreshed and hybrid Monte CarloThe total energyEtot is constant over a given trajec-tory. But it has no particular physical significance. Toimprove coverage of phase space it is common, at thebeginning of each trajectory, to “refresh” the momentap by drawing new values from their Gaussian distri-bution. Thus each trajectory starts in a new directionwith a new total energy, but the coordinatesφare keptcontinuous.
Another common variation of the method combinesrefreshed molecular dynamics with the Metropolis etal. method. This combination is called “hybrid MonteCarlo” [333]. That is, one starts a trajectory with co-ordinates p,φ. At the end of the trajectory, one hascoordinates p′,φ′. The transition φ′ ←φ is taken asa Metropolis move. The randomness in the refreshedinitial momentump makes the move stochastic. Time-reversal invariance inτ assures detailed balance. If atrajectory is rejected, one reverts to the coordinateφatthe beginning of the trajectory, selects a new stochasticmomentum, and tries again. The hybrid scheme helpscompensate for possible inaccuracies in the numericalintegration scheme, since it absolves many sins.
AutocorrelationsMarkov chains have inherent correlations between suc-cessive members. These “autocorrelations” are undesir-able, because they reduce the statistical independenceof terms in the ensemble averages of Eq. (4.2.19) thatgive expectation values of physical observables. Auto-correlation is especially a concern with methods thatmake a series of small changes in the field configura-tion. With refreshed molecular dynamics one can adjustthe trajectory length∆τ to help reduce correlations be-tweensuccessiveterms φi.Onemightexpectthatlongertrajectories are better in this regard, but the “molecularmotion” can contain cycles that bring parts of the sys-tem close to their original values. With hybrid schemes,64 4 LATTICE QCDlonger trajectories can lead to lower Metropolis accep-tance, which impedes progress. Shorter trajectories suf-fer from greater autocorrelation. Thus there is usuallyan optimum choice for the trajectory length that needsto be found empirically.
Molecular dynamics for the gauge fieldThe methods described above for a scalar field carryover to the SU(3) gauge fieldU. The gauge momentum,actually associated with the vector potential,Aµ(n), isgiven by a traceless antihermitian 3x3 matrixHµ(n)for each Uµ(n). The molecular dynamics hamiltonianis, then,H= 12∑n,µTrHµ(n)2 + Seﬀ (4.2.27)where we recall thatSeﬀ = SW + ln det[M] (4.2.28)To remain an SU(3) matrix, the equation of motion forUµ(n) must bedUµ(n)/dτ = iHµ(n)Uµ(n) . (4.2.29)The equation of motion forHµ(n) can be found by re-quiring that the molecular dynamics HamiltonianHre-main constant in molecular-dynamics time [334]. Forthe sake of pedagogy, we first ignore the fermion de-terminant and consider the unimproved SU(3) gaugetheory; see Sec.4.1:SW = β6∑n,µ̸=ν[3 −Re TrUµν(n)] (4.2.30)where Uµν(n) is the plaquette product in theµν planewith corner at siten. The plaquette can also be writtenas∑νRe Uµν(n) = Uµ(n)Vµ(n) + Vµ(n)†Uµ(n)† (4.2.31)where Vµ(n) is the sum of all “staples” attached to thelink Uµ(n). Armed with this notation, we can write0 = ˙H=∑n,µTr[˙Hµ(n)Hµ(n) + β6(˙Uµ(n)Vµ(n) + h.c.
)],(4.2.32)and, using Eq. (4.2.29), we get0 =∑n,µTr[˙Hµ(n)Hµ(n)+β6(iHµ(n)Uµ(n)Vµ(n) −h.c)], (4.2.33)Fig. 4.2.3The spectrum of the free Wilson Dirac operator fora massless quark [335].
−2−1.5−1−0.500.511.52−1 0 1 2 3 4 5Im(λ)Re(λ)Eigenvalues, 242,β = 10.0,m = 0.05,Ls = 8DDWFig. 4.2.4The spectrum of the domain wall operator at quarkmass 0.05. [336].
or0 =∑n,µTrHµ(n)[ ˙Hµ(n) + iFµ(n)] (4.2.34)where the gauge force isFµ(n) = −β6 (Uµ(n)Vµ(n) −h.c.) . (4.2.35)Since Hµ(n) in Eq. (4.2.34) is traceless the expressionin brackets must be proportional to the identity matrixcI. But if it is to remain traceless, we must havec= 0.
So, finally, we geti ˙Hµ(n) = Fµ(n) = −β3 Uµ(n)Vµ(n)|TA , (4.2.36)whereTAdenotesthetraceless,antihermitianpart.Theequations(4.2.29)and( 4.2.36)formthe basisfor molec-ular dynamics evolution of the pure gauge theory.4.2 Monte-Carlo methods 65Spectrum of the Dirac matrixThe Dirac matrix has the form (see Sec.4.1)M(U) = m+ D(U) . (4.2.37)wheremis the quark mass. For all fermion formulationsin common use today, the operatorD satisfies ”γ5 her-miticity”, namelyD† = γ5Dγ5 (4.2.38)for some definition ofγ5. (For brevity, we drop the(U)dependence ofM and D in the following.) This impliesthat the complex eigenvalues ofD appear in complexconjugate pairs. Thus we can write the fermion deter-minant asdet M =∏Im λi=0,i(m+ λi)∏Im λi>0(m2 + |λi|2) . (4.2.39)In order fordet M to serve as a probability weight, itmustberealandpositivedefinite.Indeed,forallbuttheWilson and clover actions, the real parts of the eigen-values are nonnegative. For domain-wall and Wilsonfermions, the eigenvaluesλi populate an ellipse in theright-half plane with voids, as illustrated in Figs.4.2.3and 4.2.4. For staggered fermions, they lie entirely onthe imaginary axis (not shown). For overlap fermions,they lie on a circle in the right-half complex plane tan-gent to the imaginary axis (also not shown). For Wilsonand clover fermions, they appear mostly in the right-half plane, but real, negative eigenvalues are possible,depending on the gauge configurationU. The eigenval-ues ofM are m+λi, so negativeλi usually causes trou-ble forM only for light quarks. As the lattice spacingis decreased, negative real parts become less frequent.
Twisted-mass fermions (see Sec.4.1) do not have thisproblem at maximal twist [337].
The Φ algorithmThe fermion determinant in Eq. (4.2.11) can be cast ina form compatible with the molecular-dynamics treat-ment of the gauge field. Perhaps the simplest approachis the ”Φ algorithm”. We introduce a complex latticescalar field Φ, often called a pseudofermion field, andfirst trydet M =∫dΦdΦ∗ exp[−Φ∗M−1Φ]. (4.2.40)This works as long as the eigenvalues ofM have posi-tive definite real parts. However, this form is awkwardto implement. A more convenient form works with thenormal operatorM†M. Fromγ5 hermiticity we havedet M = det[γ5M†γ5](4.2.41)det M2 = det[M†M](4.2.42)sodet M2 =∫dΦdΦ∗ exp{−Φ∗[M†M]−1Φ}. (4.2.43)Now the integral is always well defined for nonzeroquarkmass,butthesquaredoublesthenumberoffermions.
That could be acceptable if we are simulating up anddown quarks in the isospin symmetric limit (mu = md),but it would be a bad approximation for the otherquarks.Remediesarediscussedbelow.Wecontinuewiththis form.
Molecular dynamics with fermionsTo simulate Eq. (4.2.43), we note that the integrandhas the formexp(−R†R)for R= M−1Φ, so if we drawR from a Gaussian distribution, thenΦ = MR is dis-tributed according to the desired weight.
The Φ algorithm begins a short trajectory by con-structing Φ = MR for a given starting gauge fieldU.
The gauge field is then evolved withΦfixed. The forceexerted on the gauge field in Eq. (4.2.36) acquires a newcontribution, namely, the fermion force:iFF,µn = ∂i∂Aµ,nΦ∗[M†M]−1Φ= X∗ ∂i∂Aµ,n(M†M)X, (4.2.44)where M†MX = Φ. Typically, one refreshes the gaugemomentum, evolves the gauge field at the initial fixedvalue ofΦ, and then repeats.
Rational function approximationAs we saw above, working with the normal operatorM†M doubles the number of fermion species. To elimi-natethedoubling,weshouldreplace M†M with√M†M.
Similarly, for staggered fermions, we start with fourtastes per flavor, which suggests(M†M)1/8. With stag-gered fermions, the normal operator is checkerboardblock-diagonal, so restricting the calculation to evenlattice sites eliminates the normal-operator doubling.
We then want(M†M)1/4|even.
Such fractional powers are difficult to implement.
A now commonly used remedy introduces a rational-function approximation for the fractional power [338].
Expanded in terms of its poles, the rational functionapproximation for a real functionf(x) of realxhas theformf(x) ≈r(x) =N∑i=1αix−βi., (4.2.45)whereαi andβi are parameters of the rational function,and N is a suitably high order. The approximation de-teriorates for small x. It is designed to work over an66 4 LATTICE QCDinterval [xmin,xmax]. The smallerxmin or the finer thedesired accuracy, the larger the needed orderN. TheZolotarev method [339] is widely used to obtain an ef-ficient set of parametersαn and βn.
We note thatM†M = D†D+ m2 for massm. It isconvenient to treat this expression as a function ofx=D†D. So to apply the rational function approximation,we write(M†M)h ≈rh(D†D) =N∑i=1αh,iD†D−βh,i., (4.2.46)where we have labeled the coefficients of the expansionwith the desired powerh. So, finally, we havedet(M†M)h≈∫dΦdΦ∗ exp[−Φ∗rh(D†D)]Φ](4.2.47)To implement theΦalgorithm with fractional powerh,∫dΦdΦ∗ exp{−Φ∗(M†M)hΦ}, (4.2.48)we choose Gaussian randomR and calculateΦ= [M†M]−h/2R (4.2.49)using a rational function approximationr−h/2(D†D).
Then we calculate the fermion force withiFF,µn = ∂i∂Aµ,nΦ∗(M†M)hΦ= Φ∗ ∂i∂Aµ,nrh(D†D)Φ (4.2.50)=∑iX∗iαh,i∂i∂Aµ,n[M†M]Xi, (4.2.51)where Xi = [D†D−βh,i]−1Φ. Here the rational functionparameters are appropriate forrh. TheXi are obtainedusing a multishift conjugate-gradient solver.
Multiple flavorsThe rational function approximation can be extendedto handle the products of determinants that arise withmultiple flavors. For example, suppose we are simulat-ing two degenerate light quarks (up and down)ml =mu = md and one strange quarkms. We usef to dis-tinguish the flavors in the fermion matrixMf. Afterintegrating out the Grassmann fields, the fermion inte-grand becomesdet(M†l Ml)det(M†sMs)1/2. (4.2.52)We could simulate this product by introducing a sep-arate pseudofermion field for each flavor and proceed-ing as we did for a single flavor for each contribution.
However, we can also simulate it using just one pseud-ofermion field:∫dΦdΦ∗ exp{−Φ∗(M†l Ml)−1(M†sMs)−1/2Φ} (4.2.53)We construct a rational function that approximates theentire product.
(M†l Ml)−1(M†sMs)−1/2 = r−1,−1/2(D†D) , (4.2.54)where we have added more labels tor(x). The Φ al-gorithm is otherwise similar to that of the single-flavorcase.
4.2.5 ImprovementsHasenbusch termOnepopularandeffectiveimprovement[ 340]introducesa “preconditioning” determinant, a ”Hasenbusch term”,with moderately large massmx together with its com-pensating inverse, for example, as(M†l Ml)−1(M†sMs)−1/2(M†xMx)3/2(M†xMx)−3/2 .
(4.2.55)The first three factors are then assigned a single pseud-ofermion field and approximated with a single ratio-nal function, and the fourth factor is assigned a sepa-rate pseudofermion field with a separate rational func-tion. The Hasenbusch term tends to reduce the condi-tion number of the product operator, thus reducing theneeded rational function order and the associated com-putation time. The last (compensating) factor also hasa lower condition number because of the larger mass.
Multigrid solversTo evaluate the rational function in Eq. (4.2.51) re-quires solving a large linear system. As the lattice spac-ingdecreases,theconditionnumberofthelinearsystemgrows, making the conventional conjugate-gradient cal-culation more costly. This “critical slowing down” canbe mitigated by using an adaptive geometric multigridsolver instead [341, 342]. So far the benefits of usingmultigrid solvers for gauge-field evolution have beendemonstrated only for the Wilson-clover action [343].
Algorithms for multigrid solvers for staggered fermions[344] and domain-wall fermions [336, 345] are newer,so it remains to be seen whether they will lead to im-provements in molecular dynamics evolution for thosefermion formulations as well.4.3 Vacuum structure and confinement 67Accelerating molecular dynamicsAs the lattice spacing decreases, the gauge-field evolu-tion slows, and it gets trapped in a subset of gauge con-figurations with the same total topological charge. Thusit takes more computational time to obtain a new, sta-tisticallyuncorrelatedgaugeconfiguration.Long-distancedecorrelation is slower than short-distance. This obser-vation suggests Fourier transforming Hamilton’s equa-tion for the gauge momentum,idHµ(n) = Fµ(n)dτ (4.2.56)to (coordinate) momentum space, and, instead of usingacommontimestep dτ foreachmomentumcomponent,consider using a larger time step for the low-momentummodes [346] to move them farther. This method neverproved effective enough to use in full-scale simulation.
Modern versions of the Fourier acceleration scheme areunder investigation. See, for example, [347].
Trivializing mapIf we can find an invertible map of the gauge fieldU toa new fieldV,U = F(V) , (4.2.57)such that the Jacobian of the transformation cancelsthe gauge action:det[∂Uµ(n)(V)/∂Vν(m)] exp[−S(U)] = 1 , (4.2.58)thenthepathintegralbecomestrivial[ 348–350].Lüscherdescribes this as a “map to the strong-coupling limit”and discusses possible maps for the pure gauge action.
Of course, finding such a map is entirely nontrivial, butif one can at least find one that moves the action par-tially toward strong coupling, then one could constructa hybrid Monte Carlo scheme that updates the gaugefield according to the recipeU →V →V′ →U′ (4.2.59)where theV →V′ step uses standard gauge evolutionfor the transformed gauge fieldV. This stronger cou-pling evolution would suffer less from critical slowingdown. Recently, there have been efforts to find such amap using machine-learning methods. See, for example,Ref. [351].
4.2.6 Personal remarksI first learned about the lattice formulation of QCD andits virtues when Ken Wilson gave a seminar at the MITCenter for Theoretical Physics around the time he wasdevelopinghislatticeformulation.Iwasquiteimpressedwith how easily confinement, in the form of an arealaw for Wilson loops, emerged in the strong-couplingregime. But I wasn’t as brave or savvy as Creutz inproceeding to develop numerical methods for workingout the nonperturbative consequences of Wilson’s for-mulation. I didn’t turn to numerical lattice calculationsuntil shortly after Creutz’s seminal papers. For the restof my career, I have enjoyed participating in and con-tributing to the remarkable progress in this field. As agraduate student schooled in the analytic S-matrix andbootstrap, I was pleased when I could make a strong-interaction prediction to an accuracy of 25%, based onphenomenological considerations. There was always theinevitable doubt about the validity of the methods. To-day, in some cases, we are able to obtain per milleaccuracy for aome hadronic properties. Furthermore,we have little doubt that our results are a correct pre-diction of the Standard Model, since our methods aregrounded in first-principles. That has been enormouslysatisfying.
4.3 Vacuum structure and confinementDerek Leinweber4.3.1 IntroductionThe self interactions of gluons make the empty vacuumunstable to the formation of quark and gluon field con-figurations which permeate spacetime. These ground-state QCD-vacuum field configurations form the foun-dation of matter. Lattice QCD simulations enable firstprinciples explorations of this nontrivial vacuum fieldstructure.
Thesegluonfieldconfigurationsformthefoundationof every lattice QCD calculation. Each field configura-tion on its own contains a rich diversity of emergentnonperturbative structure. It is the process of averag-ing over thousands of field configurations that restoresthe translational invariance of the vacuum. Each fieldconfiguration with its own rich structure is uncorrelatedwith other configurations considered in the averagingprocess.
Deep insight into the mechanisms giving rise to theobserved quantum phenomena can be obtained throughthe visualization of these complex scientific data setsconstructed in Lattice QCD simulations, insights thatwould otherwise remain hidden in the typical gigabytedata sets of modern quantum field theory.
The essential, fundamentally-important, nonpertur-bative features of the QCD vacuum fields are: the dy-namical generation of mass through chiral symmetrybreaking, and the confinement of quarks. But what arethe fundamental mechanisms of QCD that underpin68 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.3.1Frames from the animation of Ref. [352] illustrating the Euclidean action density or energy density of Eq. (4.3.2) (left)and the corresponding topological charge density of Eq. (4.3.4) (right) at an instant in time. The spatial volume is approximately2.4 by 2.4 by 3.6 fm.
Fig. 4.3.2 Stereoscopic image of one of the eight chromo-magnetic fields composing the nontrivial vacuum of QCD. Hints forstereoscopic viewing are provided in the text.
these phenomena? What aspect of the QCD vacuumcauses quarks to be confined? Which aspect is respon-sible for dynamical mass generation? Do the underlyingmechanisms share a common origin?In this brief review, we will address these questionsin a chronological manner to convey the progress in de-veloping an understanding of the essential mechanismsunderpinning the phenomena of QCD.
4.3.2 Nonperturbative vacuum structureAmong the earliest of vacuum-structure visualizationsare images of the Euclidean action density, or energydensitySE(⃗ x,t) = 12 Fabµν(⃗ x,t) Fbaµν(⃗ x,t) , (4.3.1)= Tr(⃗E2(⃗ x,t) + ⃗B2(⃗ x,t)), (4.3.2)where Fabµν is the Euclidean field strength tensorFabµν = ∂µAabν −∂νAabµ + ig[Aabµ ,Abaν ] , (4.3.3)with color indices a, b= 1 , 2, 3. The correspondingtopologicalchargedensityproportionalto ⃗E(⃗ x,t)·⃗B(⃗ x,t)q(⃗ x,t) = g232 π2 ϵµνρσ Fabµν(⃗ x,t) Fbaρσ(⃗ x,t) , (4.3.4)is also of interest as it characterizes the profile of in-stantons, nontrivial solutions of the classical Yang-Millsequations, discussed in further detail in Sec.5.11.4.
Ref. [353] provides one of the earliest observationsof instanton-like objects in lattice gauge-field configu-rations. Here cooling with the standard Wilson actionwas used to suppress short-distance field fluctuationsenabling the observation of long-distance structures.4.3 Vacuum structure and confinement 69However a problem with the use of the standardWilson action or even the O(a2)-improved plaquetteplus rectangle action is that the lattice action of aninstanton can be reduced by shrinking the size of aninstanton [354] through lattice-spacing errors. Instan-tons shrink under cooling with these lattice actions and“fall through the lattice.” This led to the developmentof highly-improved actions [355, 356] eliminating errorsto O(a4) or even over-improved actions where improve-ment terms are tuned to stabilize instantons, ensuringtheir stability under smoothing algorithms [354, 357].
The results presented in this section are based onpure SU(3) gluon fields created with the standard Wil-son action at β = 6 .0 on a 243 ×36 lattice with alattice spacing,a≃0.1 fm. The first coordinate of theEuclidean lattice was used for the time axis creatinga 242 ×36 spatial volume. It is these calculations [358]that captured the attention of Prof Frank Wilczek as heprepared his 2004 Nobel Prize lecture. Ref. [359] pro-vides a link to the QCD Lava Lamp animation thatappeared in his Nobel Lecture [360]. In support of theNobel Lecture a web page incorporating the best algo-rithms and visualization techniques of the time was cre-ated [361]. Parallel spatially-uniform O(a4)-improvedsmoothing algorithms [362] and anO(a4)-improved lat-tice field strength tensor [355] were formulated to ac-curately retain and present the long-distance nonper-turbative properties of the ground-state vacuum fields.
These images and animations [352, 361] have since ap-pearedinpopular-sciencepublications,leadingYouTubechannels [363, 364], etc. [365].
Figure 4.3.1 displays two frames from the animationof Ref. [352]. Here 25 sweeps of three-loop, mean-field,O(a4)-improved cooling has been applied. Areas of highenergy density are rendered in red and regions of mod-erate energy density are rendered in blue. The lowestenergy densities are not rendered such that one cansee into the volume. Similarly the topological chargedensity has regions of positive density rendered in redthrough yellow and regions of negative density renderedbluethroughcyan.Whileinstanton-likeobjectsareman-ifest, current research is examining the extent to whichinstanton-dyon degrees of freedom [366], i.e. fraction-ally charged regions, can be observed within these fieldconfigurations.
To directly view the the eight chromo-electric andeight chromo-magnetic gluon fields composing the vac-uum, one must select a gauge. Figure4.3.2 presents astereoscopic illustration of one of the chromo-magneticfields in Landau gauge [367]. Here the color and lengthofthearrowsdescribethemagnitudeofthevectorfields.
Animations of the fields are also available [352].
To see the 3D image of Figs.4.3.2 and 4.3.9, try thefollowing:1. If you are viewing the image on a monitor, ensurethe image width is 12 to 13 cm.
2. Bring your eyes very close to one of the image pairs.
3. Close your eyes and relax.
4. Open your eyes and allow the (blurry) images to lineup. Tilting your head from side to side will move theimages vertically.
5. Move back slowly until your eyes are able to focus.
There’s no need to cross your eyes!With its lattice implementation of chiral symmetry,the overlap-Dirac operator provided a new approachto the exploration of the nonperturbative structure ofthe vacuum without resorting to smoothing algorithms[368]. Here low-lying Dirac eigenmode densities couldbe used to construct the topological charge density withthe level of smoothness inversely related to the num-ber of low-lying modes one considers [369]. Strong cor-relation with the instanton-like objects observed viasmoothing algorithms was observed. The zero modesare chiral and are distributed across topological chargeregions of a unique sign. Low-lying eigenmode densitiesare also highly correlated with the topological struc-tures revealed under smoothing [369]. These correla-tions between gluonic and fermionic structures exposethe dynamics underpinning dynamical chiral symmetrybreaking and the origin of mass.
The manner in which the topological charge densityis rendered can lead to rather different views on thenature of how topological charge is distributed in thevacuum. Figure 4.3.3 illustrates two different render-ings of the same topological charge density. The sheet-like structure associated with the sign-changing natureof the topological charge density correlator⟨q(0) q(x) ⟩[370, 371] is manifest when all magnitudes of the topo-logical charge density are rendered down to zero. Thisis the celebrated sheet-like structure of the topologicalcharge density [372]. However, when the rendering isrestricted to larger values, one reveals a more lumpystructure with regions of significant coherent topologi-cal charge density.
More recently explorations of correlations betweenQCDphenomenaandQEDphenomenahavecommenceddrawing on QCD+QED lattice simulations [373, 374].
First results and links to associated animations are re-ported in Ref. [365].
4.3.3 Center cluster structure of QCD vacuumfieldsFurtherinsightintothestructureofQCDvacuumfields,their temperature dependence, and their evolution un-70 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.3.3 The short-distance sheet-like structure of the vac-uum is made apparent in the left-hand illustration by renderingall magnitudes of the topological charge density down to zero.
Negative charge density is rendered green to blue, and positivecharge density is yellow to red. The same data is rendered inthe right-hand plot, this time only rendering the regions havinglarge topological charge density, revealing a structure of topo-logical lumps.
der Monte-Carlo evolution can be obtained through theconsideration of the local Polyakov loop. The expecta-tion value of the Polyakov loop is related to the finitetemperature phase transition in QCD. It has an expec-tation value of zero in the confined phase and becomesnonzero in the deconfined phase.
ThelocalPolyakovloopisthetracedgauge-invariantproduct of time-oriented gauge links around the timeextent of the lattice at each spatial pointL(⃗ x) = TrNt∏t=1U4(t,⃗ x) = ρ(⃗ x) eiφ(⃗ x) , (4.3.5)Here, U4 is the time-oriented link variable on a latticewith lattice spacinga, given byUµ(x) = Pexp(ig∫ x+ˆµaxdxµAµ(x)). (4.3.6)Center clusters [375, 376] are defined in terms ofL(⃗ x).TheyareregionsofspacewherethelocalPolyakovloop prefers a single complex phase associated with thecenter of SU(3). The deconfinement transition occursthrough the growth of a center cluster.
InthefinalexpressionofEq.( 4.3.5),thelocalPolyakovloop is decomposed into a phase, φ(⃗ x) and a magni-tude, ρ(⃗ x). Both the proximity of the phase to one ofthe cube-roots of one and the magnitude are consideredin visualizing the structure of the center domains of thegluon field. In either case, the most proximal cube rootof one to the phase is indicated by the use of color.
In Ref. [376] an anisotropic gauge action was usedto explore the evolution of coherent center domains inthe gluon field under both temperature and the Hy-brid Monte Carlo (HMC) update algorithm. To inves-tigate the larger-scale behavior of the clusters, smallscale noise is removed from the visualization by per-forming four sweeps of stout-link smearing [377] priorto calculating the Polyakov loops.
In Fig.4.3.4, clusters are rendered where the phaseφ(⃗ x) iswithinasmallwindowaroundeachcenterphase,and the rest of the volume is rendered transparent.
Withinthesecoherentcenterdomains,color-singletquark-antiquark pairs or three-quark triplets have a finite en-ergy and are spatially correlated. Thus, these funda-mental domains govern the size of the quark cores ofhadrons. As one domain dominates the vacuum abovethe critical temperature, the correlation length divergesand quarks become deconfined.
The evolution of these clusters with HMC simula-tion time is presented in Ref. [379], showing how cen-ter clusters are slowly moving with correlations in thecenter clusters persisting for approximately 5 secondscorresponding to 25 HMC trajectories. The tempera-ture dependence of the center-cluster structure is alsoexplored in these animations where a single phase even-tually dominates above the critical temperature, as il-lustrated in Fig.4.3.4.
4.3.4 Flux tubes in QCD ground-state vacuumfieldsFlux tubes in the QCD vacuum are revealed by exam-ining the correlation between ground-state field proper-ties and the positions of static quarks within the fields.
One begins with the standard approach of connect-ing static quark propagators by spatial-link paths ina gauge invariant manner. For mesonic systems, this isthe standard Wilson loop. However, for baryonic sys-tems one needs the structure illustrated in Fig.4.3.5.
The spatial link paths are typically broadened througha smearing algorithm to approximate the shape of thefluxtubeandthusobtainbetteroverlapwiththegroundstatepotentialofinterest.Whileearlycalculationstunedthe amount of smearing to provide optimal overlap withthe ground state, more modern approaches create a ba-sis of smeared sources and solve the generalized eigen-value problem to obtain the optimal combination ofsources. The static quark propagators are constructedfrom time directed link products at fixed spatial coor-dinate, ∏iUt(⃗ x,ti), using the untouched “thin” links ofthe gauge configuration.
The correlation of the gluon field with the staticquark positions is characterized by the gauge-invariantEuclidean action density SE(⃗ y,t) observed at spatialcoordinate ⃗ yand Euclidean time t measured relativeto the origin of the three-quark Wilson loop. For theresults presented herein, the action density is calculatedusing the highly-improvedO(a4) three-loop improved4.3 Vacuum structure and confinement 71Fig. 4.3.4Center clusters on a gauge field configuration atT = 0 .89(1) TC (left), T = 1 .14(2) TC (middle), andT = 1 .36(2) TC(right), This rendering from Ref. [376] is based on the proximity of the local Polyakov loop phase,φ(⃗ x), to one of the three centerphases of SU(3). The length of each side of the cubic volume is 2.4 fm. The percolation of the red phase in the middle and right-handplots illustrate the deconfinement of quarks aboveTC.
lattice field-strength tensor [355] on four-sweep APE-smeared gauge links [378].
Defining the quark positions as⃗ r1, ⃗ r2 and ⃗ r3 rela-tive to the origin of the three-quark Wilson loop, anddenoting the Euclidean time extent of the loop byτ,one evaluates the following correlation functionC(⃗ y;⃗ r1,⃗ r2,⃗ r3; τ) =⟨W3Q(⃗ r1,⃗ r2,⃗ r3; τ) SE(⃗ y,τ/2)⟩⟨W3Q(⃗ r1,⃗ r2,⃗ r3; τ)⟩⟨SE(⃗ y,τ/2)⟩, (4.3.7)where ⟨···⟩ denotes averaging over configurations andtranslational/reflection/rotationallatticesymmetries[ 378].
Note that the correlation is examined at the midpointin the time evolution of the static quark propagation toensure the three quark state has relaxed to its groundFig.4.3.5 Gauge-linkpathsforthreestaticquarkpropagators,U1, U2, and U3, are connected in a gauge-invariant mannervia spatially smeared link paths.εabc and εa′b′c′provide coloranti-symmetrisation at the source and sink respectively, whileτ indicates evolution of the three-quark system in Euclideantime [378].
state form. For fixed quark positions and Euclideantime, C is a scalar field in three dimensions.
This measure has the advantage of being positivedefinite,eliminatinganysignambiguityonwhethervac-uumfieldfluctuationsareenhancedorsuppressedinthepresence of static quarks. The correlation,C, is gener-ally less than 1, signaling the expulsion of vacuum fluc-tuations from the interior of heavy-quark hadrons. Inother words, flux tubes represent the suppression of thevacuum field fluctuations that form the foundation ofmatter.
Figure 4.3.6 provides an illustration of the correla-tion C(⃗ y). For values of⃗ ywell away from the quark po-sitions ⃗ ri, there are no correlations andC →1. As theseparation between the quark-antiquark pair changes,the flux tube of Fig. 4.3.6 (top) gets longer, but thediameter of the tube and the depth of the expulsionremain approximately constant. As it costs energy toexpelthevacuumfieldfluctuations,theconfinementpo-tential grows linearly as the quark separation increases.
Of historical significance was the endeavor to de-termine whether baryon flux tubes are Y-shape or∆-shape (empty triangle) in nature. For the latter, theexpectation was two-body tube-like structures aroundthe edge of the three-quark system would dominate.
Quantitative analyses of the static quark potential andthe distribution of flux tubes led to a consensus [380]that the distribution is Y shape for large quark separa-tions more than∼0.5 fm from the system center withthe observation of filled∆ shapes at shorter-distanceseparations. The Y-shape ground state localizes at theSteiner point which minimizes the total string length.
The characteristic sizes of the flux-tube and nodewere quantified in Ref. [378]. The ground state flux-tube radius is∼0.4 fm with vacuum-field fluctuationssuppressed by 7%. The node connecting the flux tubes72 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.3.6The suppression of QCD vacuum fields, as represented by the energy density, from the region between a quark-antiquarkmeson (top) or three-quark baryon (bottom). Quark positions are illustrated by the colored spheres. The separation of the quarksin the meson are 0.50 fm (left), 1.00 fm (middle), and 1.50 fm (right). The baryon frames illustrate the spherical cavity (or bag)observed at small quark separations of 0.27 fm from the center (left), the development of a filled-∆shape at moderate separationsof 0.42 fm (middle) and finally the emergence of a Y-shape flux tube (right) at large quark separations of 0.72 fm from the systemcenter [378]. The surface plot illustrates the reduction of the vacuum energy density in a plane passing through the centers of thequarks. The vector field illustrates the gradient of this reduction. The tube joining the quarks reveals the positions in space wherethe vacuum energy density is maximally expelled and corresponds to the “flux tube” of QCD.
is larger at 0.5 fm with a suppression of the vacuumaction at 8%.
4.3.5 Flux tube string breaking in QCDWith the advent of numerical simulations incorporat-ing the dynamics of light fermion loops in the QCDvacuum, the observation of flux-tube breaking or stringbreaking was keenly anticipated. The idea is that for in-creasing quark separations, eventually there would beenough energy in the flux tube joining the two staticbquarks that it would become energetically favorable tobreak the string through the creation of a light quark-antiquark pair and the formation of two B mesons.
Even to this day, this implicit form of string break-ing has yet to be observed. The difficulty lies in theextraordinarily poor overlap of the two-B meson statewith the spatial flux-tube operators used to create thestring state.
This situation is in contrast to explorations of thestructure of the Λ(1405) baryon, where lattice-QCDcalculations of the quark-sector contributions to thebaryon magnetic moment indicate a molecular meson-baryon structure [381, 382]. Here a three-quark opera-tor carrying the quantum numbers of theΛ(1405) haveimplicitly excitedquark-antiquarkpairstoformthefive-quark molecule.
In the absence of implicit string breaking, Baliet al.
[383] led the breakthrough in observing string break-ing in QCD via a variational method with explicitB-meson operators. These interpolating fields mix withthe traditional flux-tube operators in a matrix of cor-relation functions. Upon solving for the energy eigen-states, mixed states with their associated avoided levelcrossings are observed.
Following the notation of Ref. [383], the calculationproceeds as follows. TheQQstatic quark operator con-nected with an optimized spatially smeared flux-tubeoperator Vt(r,0) from position0 to r at Euclidean timet isQ(r,t)γ ·rr Vt(r,0) Q(0,t) , (4.3.8)where γ ·r/r selects the spin-symmetric state to becombined with the symmetric gluonic string Vt(r,0),enabling mixing with two pseudoscalarBmesons. Note,the anti-symmetric spin-combination is obtained viaγ ·r/r→γ5 and yields the same energy levels, as bothspin cases are calculated from the same Wilson loop.
Similarly, the BB meson interpolating field for apseudoscalar B meson at r and a B meson at 0 atEuclidean timet isQ(r,t) γ5 qi(r,t) ¯qi(0,t) γ5 Q(0,t) , (4.3.9)4.3 Vacuum structure and confinement 73-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.2 0 0.2 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18[E(r) - 2 mB]ar/a- state |1>state |2>-0.2-0.15-0.1-0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19[E(r) - 2 mB]ar/a- state |1>state |2>Fig. 4.3.7 From Ref. [383], the two energy levels obtainedin the variational analysis are plotted as a function of thestatic quark-antiquark separationr/a with lattice spacinga≈0.083 fm. Energy values are relative to twice the mass ofthe B-meson, 2 mB (horizontal line). The curve correspondsto the three parameter fit of E1(r) = V0 + σr − e/r, for0.2 fm ≤ r ≤ 0.9 fm < rc with rc ≈ 15 a ≈ 1.25 fm.. Thebottom plot zooms into the avoided level crossing.
where qi(r,t) annihilates the light-quark flavor, i. Thefour elements of the correlation matrix are obtainedfrom the four combinations of these two operators.
Contracting the heavy-quark operators in the stan-dard flux-tube operators provides[Q(r,t)γ ·rr Vt(r,0)Q(0,t)]†Q(r,0)γ ·rr V0(r,0)Q(0,0)= 2 tr{V†t (r,0) Ur(t,0) V0(r,0) U†0(t,0)}≡(4.3.10)where the heavy-quark mass dependence has been sup-pressed for simplicity. HereUr(t,0) denotes the productof time-oriented links at the positionr from time0 tot and the trace is over color indices. This is the stan-dard Wilson loop depicted by ther (horizontally) byt(vertically) rectangle in Eq. (4.3.10).
Similarly, contracting out the quark field operatorsin the mixed correlator providesQ(0,t) γ5 qi(0,t) ¯qi(r,t) γ5 Q(r,t) Q(r,0)γ ·rr V0(r,0) Q(0,0)≡ = (4.3.11)where the wavy line depicts a light quark operator. Fi-nally, contraction of the quark operators in theBB cor-relator providesQ(0,t) γ5 qi(0,t) ¯qi(r,t) γ5 Q(r,t) Q(r,0) γ5 qj(r,0) ¯qj(0,0) γ5 Q(0,0)≡(δij −). (4.3.12)Considering nf fermion flavors, one finally arrives atthe correlation matrixC(t) =√nf√nf −nf +. (4.3.13)Calculation of the light-quark propagators demandsthe use of all-to-all techniques. Ref. [383] used a trun-catedeigenmodeapproach,complementedbyastochas-tic estimator technique, improved by hopping parame-ter acceleration. Through the use of a tuned flux-tubeoperator and tuned smeared-local quark propagators inthe meson operators, the correlation matrix is parame-terized in terms of two low lying energy eigenstates andsolved.
Figure 4.3.7 illustrates the two energy levels ob-tained in the nf = 2 analysis of Ref. [383]. Remark-ably, the region of mixing is small and the energy asso-ciated with the mixing is subtle. The analysis has sincebeen extended to2 + 1 light+strange fermion flavors inRef. [384] where bothB and Bs mesons participate inthe mixing.
These results reflect the diverse nature of these twostates. Indeed with so little overlap between the twostates away from the avoided crossing region, a string-oriented system may evolve such that it maintains thestring structure at very large separations [385]. In this“sudden approximation,” the system evolves along thered lines of Fig.4.3.7 providing a pathway to extraordi-narily high energy excitations. The subsequent decay isconsidered “adiabatic” [385] where hadrons then followthe energy-eigenstate curves and split into fragments.74 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.3.8 The topological charge density from Ref. [371] forthe quenched (top) and the light-quark dynamical ensemblefromtheMILCCollaboration[ 386,387],withdynamicalmassesof amu,d = 0 .0062, am=0.031.
4.3.6 Impact of dynamical fermions on vacuumfield structureWith the advent of full QCD simulations incorporat-ing the effects of light dynamical-fermion flavors, atten-tion turned to understanding how these light fermionloops in the vacuum changed the QCD ground-statestructure. Drawing on gauge fields from the MILC col-laboration [386, 387], advances in instanton-preservingsmoothing algorithms [357] were deployed to reveal theimpact of dynamical fermions on the topological chargedensity of the gauge fields [371].
The MILC simulations were performed using a one-loop Symanzik improved gauge action and an improvedKogut-Susskind quark action. Using the static quarkpotential,thelatticespacingsweredeterminedandtunedto be the same in all the runs to better expose differ-ences due to dynamical fermions. At large distances,screening of the string tension was observed for lightdynamical flavors [386, 387].
Figure 4.3.8 illustrates the topological-charge den-sities revealed following four sweeps of over-improvedstout-linksmearing[ 371].ThetopillustrationfromquenchedQCD, is qualitatively different from the lower illustra-tion for a 2 + 1 flavor dynamical-fermion configura-tion10. The zero modes associated with well-separated10 In the top illustration, one can see through the bulk ofthe topological charge distribution and observe the white back-ground and the dotted lattice grid lines. This is not the casein the lower illustration where the topological charge fills outthe space. Only a sprinkling of white space is observed. Thequark-mass dependence of the dynamical-fermion illustration issubtle [371] indicating that the qualitative differences in the dis-tributions comes about through the introduction of dynamicalfermions in generating the configurations through Monte-Carlomethods. Not only are the objects in the quenched simulationtopological objects act to suppress the fermion determi-nant, such that the top configuration is improbable infull QCD. In the full-QCD simulations, the topologicalobjects grow in size and number [371] to suppress thezero modes.
4.3.7 Center vortex structure of QCD vacuumfieldsThe essential, fundamentally-important, nonperturba-tive features of the QCD vacuum fields are the dynami-cal generation of mass through chiral symmetry break-ing, and the confinement of quarks. But what is thefundamental mechanism of QCD that underpins thesephenomena?One of the most promising candidates is the centervortex perspective of QCD vacuum structure. Whilethe ideas of a center-vortex dominated vacuum werelaid down long ago [388–390], it wasn’t until 1997 whenJeffGreensite,ManfriedFaber, et al. demonstratedthatlattice QCD techniques could be used to explore theimportance of these ideas [391–396]. Indeed by the endof the millennium, the field had attracted broad interestwith a comprehensive review in 2003 [397].
This perspective describes the nature of the non-trivial vacuum in terms of the most fundamental centerof the gauge group. Herein our focus is on theSU(3)gauge group where center vortices are characterized bythe three center phases,3√1.
By identifying center vortices within the ground-state fields and then removing them, a deep under-standing of their contributions can been developed. Re-moval of center vortices from the ground-state fields re-sultsinalossofdynamicalmassgenerationandrestora-tion of chiral symmetry [398–400], a loss of the stringtension[401–404],asuppressionoftheinfraredenhance-ment in the Landau-gauge gluon propagator [402, 405–407], and the possibility that gluons are no longer con-fined [407].
One can also examine the role of the center vorticesalone. Remarkably, center vortices produce both a lin-ear static quark potential [401, 403, 404, 408, 409] andinfrared enhancement in the Landau-gauge gluon prop-agator [406, 407]. The planar vortex density of center-vortex degrees of freedom scales with the lattice spacingproviding a well defined continuum limit [401]. Theseresults elucidate strong connections between center vor-tices and confinement.
further apart, a statistical analysis indicates there are fewerobjects and the objects themselves are smaller in size whencompared with the dynamical fermion distributions [371]. Thephysics underpinning these differences in the topological chargedensity distributions can be understood in terms of the modesof the Dirac operator generated by these distributions.4.3 Vacuum structure and confinement 75Aconnectionbetweencentervorticesandinstantonswas identified through gauge-field smoothing [409]. Anunderstanding of the phenomena linking these degreesof freedom was illustrated in Ref. [410]. In addition,center vortices have been shown to give rise to masssplitting in the low-lying hadron spectrum [398, 399,411].
Still, the picture in pureSU(3) gauge theory is notperfect. The vortex-only string tension obtained frompure Yang-Mills lattice studies has been consistentlyshown to be about ∼60% of the full string tension.
Moreover, upon removal of center vortices the gluonpropagatorshowedaremnantofinfraredenhancement[ 406].
In short, within the pure gauge sector, the removal oflong-distance non-perturbative effects via center-vortexremoval is not perfect.
Understanding the impact of dynamical fermions onthe center-vortex structure of QCD ground-state fieldsis a contemporary focus of the center-vortex field [400,403, 404, 407, 412, 413]. Herein, changes in the micro-scopic structure of the vortex fields associated with theinclusion of dynamical fermions are illustrated. The in-troductionofdynamicalfermionsbringsthephenomenol-ogy of center vortices much closer to a perfect encap-sulation of the salient features of QCD, confinementand dynamical mass generation through chiral symme-try breaking.
Assuch,itisinterestingtoask,whatdothesecenter-vortex structures look like? To this end, we present vi-sualizations of center vortices as identified on latticegauge-field configurations. Some of these visualizationsare presented as stereoscopic images. See the instruc-tions provided in Sec.4.3.2 for help in viewing theseimages.
Center Vortex IdentificationCenter vortices are identified through a gauge fixingprocedure designed to bring the lattice link variables asclose as possible to the identity matrix multiplied by aphaseequaltooneofthethreecube-rootsof1.Here,theoriginal Monte-Carlo generated configurations are con-sidered. They are gauge transformed directly to Maxi-mal Center Gauge [401, 414, 415]. This brings the lat-tice link variablesUµ(x) close to the center elements ofSU(3),Z = exp(2πi3 n)I , (4.3.14)with n= −1, 0, or1 enumerating the three cube rootsof 1 such that the special property ofSU(3) matrices,det(Z) = 1 , is satisfied. One considers gauge transfor-mations Ω such that,∑x,µ⏐⏐tr UΩµ (x)⏐⏐2 Ω→max , (4.3.15)and then projects the link variables to the centerUµ(x) →Zµ(x) where Zµ(x) = exp(2πi3 nµ(x))I .
(4.3.16)Here, n has been promoted to a field,nµ(x), taking avalue of −1, 0, or 1 for each link variable on the lat-tice. In this way, the gluon field,Uµ(x), is characterizedby the most fundamental aspect of theSU(3) link vari-able, the center,Zµ(x). In the projection step, eight de-grees of freedom are reduced to one of the three centerphases. This “vortex-only” field,Zµ(x), can be exam-ined to learn the extent to which center vortices alonecapture the essence of nonperturbative QCD.
The product of these center-projected links,Zµ(x),around an elementary1 ×1 square (plaquette) on thelattice also produces a centre element ofSU(3). Thevalue describes the center charge associated with thatplaquettez=∏2Zµ(x) = exp(2πim3), m= −1,0, or1 .
(4.3.17)The most common value observed hasm= 0 indicatingthat no centre charge pierces the plaquette. However,values of m = ±1 indicate that the center line of anextended three-dimensional vortex pierces that plaque-tte.
The complete center-line of an extended vortex isidentified by tracing the presence of nontrivial centercharge,m= ±1,throughthespatiallattice.Figure 4.3.9exhibits rich emergent structure in the nonperturbativeQCD ground-state fields in a stereoscopic image. Here a3D slice of the 4D space-time lattice is being consideredat fixed time. Features include:Vortex Lines:The plaquettes with nontrivial center charge, charac-terized bym = +1 or −1, are plotted as jets piercingthe center of the plaquette. Both the orientation andcolor of the jets reflect the value of the non-trivial cen-ter charge. Using a right-hand rule for the direction,plaquettes withm= +1 are illustrated by blue jets inthe forward direction, and plaquettes withm= −1 areillustrated by red jets in the backward direction. Thus,the jets show the directed flow ofm= +1 center charge,76 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.3.9Stereoscopic image of center vortices as identified on the lattice from Ref. [412]. Vortex features including vortex lines(jets), branching points (3-jet combinations), crossing points (4 jets), indicator links (arrows) and singular points (spheres) aredescribed in the text.
z= e2πi/3, through spatial plaquettes. They are analo-gous to the line running down the center of a vortex ina fluid.
Vortices are somewhat correlated with the positionsof significant topological charge density, but not in astrong manner [410]. However, the percolation of vortexstructure is significant and the removal of these vorticesdestroys most instanton-like objects.
Branching Points or Monopoles:InSU(3) gaugetheory,threevortexlinescanmergeintoor emerge from a single point. Their prevalence is sur-prising, as is their correlation with topological chargedensity [410].
Vortex Sheet Indicator Links:As the vortex line moves through time, it creates avortex sheet in 4D spacetime. This movement is illus-trated by arrows along the links of the lattice (shownas cyan and orange arrows in Fig.4.3.9) indicating cen-ter charge flowing through space-time plaquettes in thesuppressed time direction.
Singular Points:When the vortex sheet spans all four space-time dimen-sions, it can generate topological charge. Lattice siteswith this property are called singular points [396, 416–418] and are illustrated by spheres. The sphere colorindicates the number of times the sheet adjacent toa point can generate a topological charge contribution[410].
Ref. [413] presents the first results demonstratingthe impact of dynamical fermions on the center-vortexstructure of QCD ground-state fields. There matchedlatticeswereconsidered,oneinpure-gaugeandtheothera 2+1-flavor dynamical-fermion lattice from the PACS-CS Collaboration [419]. These 323 ×64 lattice ensem-bles employ a renormalisation-group improved Iwasakigaugeactionandnon-perturbatively O(a)-improvedWil-son quarks, withCSW = 1.715.
The lightest u- and d-quark-mass ensemble iden-tified by a pion mass of 156 MeV [419] is presentedhere. The scale is set using the Sommer parameter withr0 = 0.4921 fm providing a lattice spacing ofa= 0.0933fm [419]. A matched323 ×64 pure-gauge ensemble us-ing the same improved Iwasaki gauge action with aSommer-scale spacing ofa= 0.100 fm was created [413]to enable comparisons with the PACS-CS ensembles.
The center-vortex structure of pure-gauge and dy-namicalfermionground-statevacuumfieldsisillustratedin Fig. 4.3.10 from Ref. [413], where interactive 3Dplots of this structure which can be activated in AdobeReader.Theimpactofdynamicalfermionsonthecenter-vortex structure is much more significant than that dis-cussed in Sec.4.3.6.
In both illustrations, the vortex structure is domi-nated by a single large percolating structure. Whereassmall loops will tend to pierce a Wilson loop twice withzero effect, it is this extended structure that gives riseto a net vortex piercing of a Wilson loop and the gener-ation of an area law associated with confinement. Thesetwo illustrations are representative of the ensemble inthat the vortex structure is typically dominated by asingle large percolating cluster.
Closer inspection reveals a continuous flow of centercharge, often emerging or converging to monopole or4.3 Vacuum structure and confinement 77Fig. 4.3.10From Ref. [413], the center-vortex structure of a ground-state vacuum field configuration in pure SU(3) gauge theory(left) is compared with a field configuration in dynamical 2+1 flavor QCD corresponding tomπ = 156 MeV (right). The flow of+1 center charge through the gauge fields is illustrated by the jets. Blue jets are used to illustrate the single percolating vortexstructure, while other colors illustrate smaller structures.
anti-monopole vertices where three jets emerge from orconverge to a point. These are referred to as branchingpoints, as a+1 center charge flowing out of a vertex isequivalent to+2 center charge flowing into the vertexand subsequently branching to two+1 jets flowing outof the vertex.
With the introduction of dynamical fermions, thestructure becomes more complex, both in the abun-dance of vortices and branching points. The averagenumber of vortices composing the primary cluster inthese 322 ×64 spatial slices roughly doubles from ∼3,000 vortices in the pure gauge theory to∼6,000 infull QCD. Still, there are322 ×64×3 = 196 ,608 spatialplaquettes on these lattices and thus the presence of avortex is a relatively rare occurrence.
By counting the number of vortices between branch-ing points one discovers the distribution is exponential,indicating a constant branching probability. This prob-ability is higher in full QCD by a ratio of∼3/2.
With an understanding of the impact of dynamical-fermion degrees of freedom on the center-vortex struc-tureofground-statevacuumfields,attentionhasturnedto understanding the impact on confinement. In a vari-ational analysis of standard Wilson loops composed ofseveral spatially-smeared sources to isolate the groundstate potential, the static quark potential has been cal-culated on three ensembles including the original un-touched links,Uµ(x), the vortex-only links,Zµ(x), andvortex-removed links,Z†µ(x) Uµ(x) [407] where the mul-tiplication of the conjugate of the centre-projected fieldensure all plaquettes havez= 0.
For the original untouched configurations, the staticquark potential is expected to follow a Cornell potentialV(r) = V0 −αr + σr. (4.3.18)r/a0.000.250.500.751.001.251.501.752.00aV (r)UTVRVO0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16r/a0.0000.0250.0500.0750.100a2 σFig. 4.3.11 The static quark potential, as presented inRef. [403], calculated on the vortex-modified dynamical-fermionensemble, corresponding to a pion mass of156 MeV. The lowerplot shows the local slope from linear fits of the potentials inthe upper plot over a forward-looking window fromr to r+4a.
As center vortices are anticipated to encapsulate thenon-perturbativelong-rangephysics,thevortex-onlyre-sults should give rise to a linearly rising potential. Ontheotherhand,thevortex-removedresultsareexpectedtocapturetheshort-rangeCoulombbehavior.Figure 4.3.11from Ref. [407] illustrates the static quark potentialsobtained from these three ensembles for the dynamical2+1-flavor ensemble with a pion mass of 156 MeV [419].
Qualitatively, center vortices account for the long-distance physics. The removal of center vortices com-pletely removes the confinement potential. And whilethe vortex-only string tension is typically60 % of theoriginal string tension in the pure gauge sector, theintroduction of dynamical fermions has improved thevortex-only phenomenology significantly. Vortices alonecapture both the screening of the pure-gauge string ten-78 4 LATTICE QCDsion and the full string tension of the original untouchedensemble. This result is associated with the significantmodification of the center-vortex structure of ground-state vacuum fields induced by dynamical fermions.
The improved separation of perturbative and non-perturbativephysicsthroughtheconsiderationofvortex-removed and vortex-only ensembles in full QCD is alsomanifest in the nonperturbativegluon propagator [407].
This time vortex removal removes the infrared enhance-ment of the gluon propagator, leaving a tree-level struc-ture. Indeed the vortex-removed Euclidean correlatorremains positive definite, admitting the possibility ofa positive-definite spectral density associated with freegluons. The vortex-only ensembles capture the infraredenhancement of the gluon propagator and the screeningof this enhancement in full QCD [407].
Similarly, dynamical mass generation in the non-perturbative quark propagator is suppressed under vor-tex removal in full QCD while the vortex-only ensem-ble provides dynamical mass generation [400]. Whileexplicit chiral symmetry breaking through the quarkmass, leaves a remnant of dynamical mass generation,it is anticipated that for sufficiently light current quarkmasses, chiral symmetry will be restored [399] and dy-namical mass generation will be completely eliminatedin the vortex-removed theory.
Insummary,center-vortexstructureiscomplex.Eachground-stateconfigurationisdominatedbyalong-distancepercolatingcenter-vortexstructure.In SU(3) gaugefieldtheory, a proliferation of branching points is observed,with further enhancement as light dynamical fermiondegrees of freedom are introduced in simulating QCD.
Thereisanapproximatedoublinginthenumberofnon-trivialcenterchargesinthepercolatingvortexstructureas one goes from the pure-gauge theory to full QCD. In-creased complexity in the vortex paths is also observedas the number of branching points is significantly in-creased with the introduction of dynamical fermions.
In short, dynamical-fermion degrees of freedom radi-cally alter the center-vortex structure of the ground-state vacuum fields. This change in structure acts toimprove the phenomenology of center vortices betterreproducing the string tension, dynamical mass gen-eration and better removing nonperturbative physicsunder vortex removal. This represents a significant ad-vance in the ability of center vortices to capture thesalient nonperturbative features of QCD.
4.3.8 SummaryIn the 50 years following the advent of QCD, the com-plexity of the nontrivial QCD vacuum has been ex-posed. Many theoretical ideas have been created anddeveloped to explain the salient features of this nontriv-ial vacuum and their exploration continues. Numericalexperiments within the realm of lattice QCD have beenparticularly useful in testing the veracity of the theoret-icalideasproposed.Today,thesenumericalexperimentsare exploring the ideas of instanton-dyons and center-vortices as the essential features of QCD vacuum struc-ture, confining color and dynamically generating massthrough dynamical chiral symmetry breaking. The re-sults are fascinating, and encourage further explorationof the essence of QCD vacuum structure.
4.4 QCD at non-zero temperature and den-sityF rithjof Karsch4.4.1 QCD Thermodynamics on Euclidean lat-ticesThe path integral formulation of QCD can easily beapplied to cases of non-vanishing temperature (T) andother external control parameters, e.g. the chemical po-tentials (µf) that couple to the conserved currents ofquark-flavor number.
Using the lattice regularization scheme of QCD, in-troduced by K. Wilson [80], QCD thermodynamics isformulatedonEuclideanspace-timelatticesofsize N3σNτwhere, for a given lattice spacing (a), the lattice extentin Euclidean time controls the temperatureT = 1/Nτaand the spatial extent is related to the volume of thethermodynamic system, V = ( Nσa)3. The chemicalpotentials enter directly in the fermion matrices,Mf,which arise from the QCD Lagrangian after integratingout the fermion fields.
Bulk thermodynamics can then be derived from thelattice regularized partition function,Z =∫ Nτ∏x0=1Nσ∏xi=13∏ˆν=0DUx,ˆν e−SG×∏f=u,d,s..
det Mf(mf,µf) , (4.4.1)where x = ( x0,⃗ x) labels the sites of the 4-dimensionallattice, SG denotes the gluonic part of the Euclideanaction, which is expressed in terms ofSU(3) matricesUx,ˆν and Mf is the fermion matrix for quark flavorf.
It is a function of quark mass,mf and flavor chemicalpotential ˆµf ≡µf/T. Basic bulk thermodynamic ob-servables (equation of state, susceptibilities, etc.) canthen be obtained from the logarithm of the partitionfunction, Z, which defines the pressure,P, asP/T = 1V ln Z(T,V,⃗ µ,⃗ m) . (4.4.2)4.4 QCD at non-zero temperature and density 79Applying standard thermodynamic relations one ob-tains other observables of interest; e.g. the energy den-sityisrelatedtothetraceanomalyoftheenergy-momen-tum tensor,Θµµ,ΘµµT4 = ϵ−3PT4 ≡T∂P/T4∂T , (4.4.3)and the conserved charge densities are obtained as,nXT3 = ∂P/T4∂ˆµX, X = B, Q, S . (4.4.4)While the framework of lattice QCD provides easyaccess to QCD thermodynamics at vanishing valuesof the chemical potentials, major difficulties arise atµf ̸= 0. The fermion determinants,detMf(mf,µf), areno longer positive definite when the real part of thechemical potential is non-zero,Reˆµf ̸= 0. This includesthe physically relevant case of strictly real chemical po-tentials. The presence of a complex valued integrandin the path integral makes the application of standardMonte Carlo techniques, which rely on a probabilisticinterpretation of integration measures, impossible. Thetwo most common approaches to circumvent this prob-lem are to either (i) perform numerical calculations atimaginary values of the chemical potential,ˆµ2f <0 [420,421], or to (ii) perform Taylor series expansions aroundˆµf = 0 [422, 423]. In the former case numerical resultsneed to be analytically continued to real values ofµf.
In the latter case the QCD partition function is writtenas,P/T4 = 1VT 3 ln Z(T,V,⃗ µ) =∞∑i,j,k=0χBQSijki!j!k! ˆµiBˆµjQˆµkS ,(4.4.5)with χBQS000 ≡P(T,V, ⃗0)/T4 and expansion coefficients,χBQSijk (T) = ∂P/T4∂ˆµiB∂ˆµjQ∂ˆµkS⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐ˆµ=0, (4.4.6)can be determined in Monte Carlo simulations per-formed atˆµX = 0.
The phase structure of QCD can be explored usingsuitable observables that are sensitive to the sponta-neous breaking and the eventual restoration of globalsymmetries. They can act as order parameters in cer-tain limits of the parameter space spanned by the quarkmasses. In QCD exact symmetries exist either in thechiral limit,i.e. at vanishing values ofnf quark masses,orforinfinitelyheavyquarks, i.e. inpure SU(Nc) gaugetheories, withNc denoting the number of colors.
In order to probe the restoration of the global chiralsymmetries one analyzes the chiral condensate and itssusceptibilities,⟨¯χχ⟩f = TV∂∂mfln Z = TV ⟨TrM−1f ⟩, (4.4.7)χfgm = ∂⟨¯χχ⟩f∂mg, χ ft = T∂⟨¯χχ⟩f∂T . (4.4.8)The former is an order parameter for the restorationof the SU(nf)L ×SU(nf)R chiral flavor symmetry ofQCD and distinguishes, in the limit of vanishing quarkmasses, a symmetry broken phase at low temperaturefrom a chiral symmetry restored phase at high temper-ature,limmℓ→0⟨¯χχ⟩ℓ{>0 T 0 ⇔Fq <∞,T >Td(4.4.11)whereGL(⃗ x) = e −F¯qq(⃗ x,T) = ⟨TrL⃗0TrL†⃗0⟩ (4.4.12)is the correlation function of two Polyakov loops. It de-notes the changein free energy (excess free energy,F¯qq),that is due to the presence of two static quark sourcesintroduced in a thermal medium. At zero temperaturethis free energy reduces to the potential between staticquark sources.
At least in the case of pure gauge theories this pro-vides a connection between the confinement-deconfine-ment phase transition and the breaking of a global sym-metry,the Z(Nc) centersymmetryofthe SU(Nc) gaugegroup. This symmetry, however, is explicitly broken in80 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.4.1 First evidence for the existence of a deconfinement phase transition inSU(2) gauge theories using the Polyakovloop expectation value as an order parameter (left) [424] and a first extrapolation of the phase transition temperature to thecontinuum limit (middle) [425] . The right hand figure shows a first comparison of the temperature dependence of the Polyakovloop (W ≡ ⟨|L|⟩) and chiral condensate (⟨ ¯ψψ⟩) order parameters in a SU(3) gauge theory [426] .
the presence of dynamical quarks with massmf <∞.
Unlike chiral symmetry restoration, deconfinement thusis not expected to be related to a phase transition inQCD with physical quark masses. Nonetheless, the con-sequencesofdeconfinement,relatedtothedissolutionofhadronic bound states, becomes clearly visible in manythermodynamic observables.
4.4.2 Early lattice QCD calculations at non-zerotemperatureAlmost immediately after the formulation of QCD asthetheoryofstronginteractionphysics,itsconsequencesfor strong interaction matter at non-zero temperaturewere examined [427, 428]. It rapidly became obviousthat fundamental properties of QCD, confinement andasymptotic freedom on the one hand [428, 429], andchiral symmetry breaking on the other hand [430], arelikely to trigger a phase transition in strong interac-tion matter that separates a phase being dominated byhadrons as the relevant degrees of freedom from that ofalmost free quarks and gluons. The notion of a quark-gluon plasma was coined at that time [431].
Soon after these early, conceptually important de-velopments it was realized that the formulation of QCDon discrete space-time lattices, which was introducedby K. Wilson as a regularization scheme in QCD [80],also provides a powerful framework for the analysis ofnon-perturbative properties of strong interaction mat-ter through Monte-Carlo simulations [328]. This led toa first determination of a phase transition temperaturein SU(2) [424, 425] and SU(3) [426, 432, 433] gaugetheories, and a first determination of the equation ofstate of purely gluonic matter [434, 435]. The interplaybetweendeconfinementontheonehandandchiralsym--500 0 500 1000 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3r [fm]Fav [MeV]T/Tpc0.760.810.900.961.001.021.071.231.501.98Fig. 4.4.2 The so-called color averaged, heavy quark free en-ergy(Fav ≡ F¯qq)inthevicinityofthepseudo-criticaltransitiontemperature (Tpc) in 2-flavor QCD [436]. Results shown covera temperature range fromT/Tpc ≃ 0.75 to T/Tpc ≃ 2.
metry restoration on the other hand also was studied[426]earlyon andthe questionwhether ornot thesetwoaspects of QCD may lead to two distinct phase tran-sitions in QCD has been considered ever since. Someresults from these first lattice QCD studies of the ther-modynamics of strong interaction matter are shown inFig. 4.4.1.
At physical values of the quark masses, neither de-confinement nor the effective restoration of chiral sym-metry leads to a true phase transition. Still the tran-sition from the low temperature hadronic to the hightemperature partonic phase of QCD is clearly visiblein the pseudo-critical behavior of the heavy quark freeenergy and the chiral condensate respectively. Some re-cent results on these observables, obtained in simula-tions of QCD with light, dynamical quark degrees offreedom, are shown in Figs.4.4.2 and 4.4.3.4.4 QCD at non-zero temperature and density 814.4.3 Global symmetries and the QCD phase di-agramThe early studies of QCD thermodynamics made itclear that universality arguments and renormalizationgroup techniques, successfully developed in condensedmatter physics and applied in statistical physics to theanalysis of phase transitions, also can be carried overto the analysis of the phase structure of quantum fieldtheories[437,438].Therenormalizationgroupbasedar-guments for the existence of a second order phase tran-sitionintheuniversalityclassofthe3-dIsingmodelinaSU(2) gauge theory, and a first order transition for theSU(3) color group of QCD [439] have been confirmedby detailed lattice QCD calculations [440, 441].
In the presence ofnf light, dynamical quarks, dis-tinguished by a flavor quantum number, it is the chiralsymmetry of QCD that triggers the occurrence of phasetransitions [430]. In addition to a globalU(1) symmetrythat reflects the conservation of baryon number and isunbroken at all temperatures and densities, the mass-less QCD Lagrangian is invariant under the symmetrygroupU(1)A ×SU(nf)L ×SU(nf)R . (4.4.13)The SU(nf)L×SU(nf)R symmetry corresponds to chi-ral rotations ofnf massless quark fields in flavor space.
This symmetry is spontaneously broken at low temper-atures, giving rise ton2f −1 massless Goldstone modes,which fornf = 2 are the three light pions of QCD. Theyhave a non-vanishing mass only because of the explicitbreakingofchiralsymmetrybyamasstermintheQCDLagrangian that couples to the chiral order parameterfield ¯χfχf.Theaxial U(1)A groupcorrespondstoglobalrotations of quark fields for a given flavorf. Althoughit is an exact symmetry of the classical Lagrangian, it isexplicitly broken in the quantized theory. This explicitbreakingofaglobalsymmetry,arisingfromfluctuationson the quantum level, is known as theU(1)A anomaly.
The renormalization group based analysis of the chi-ral phase transition, performed by Pisarski and Wilczek[430], made it clear that the chiral phase transition issensitive to the number of light quark flavors that be-come massless. Furthermore, it has been argued in [430]that the order of the transition may be sensitive to themagnitude of the axial anomaly at non-zero tempera-ture, which is closely related to the temperature depen-dence of topological non-trivial field configurations.
Although it was generally expected that the chiralphase transition in 3-flavor QCD becomes a first or-der phase transition in the chiral limit [430], there iscurrently no direct evidence for this from lattice QCDcalculations. In fact, the current understanding is that 0 5 10 15 20 25 130 135 140 145 150 155 160 165 170 175 180MT [MeV]mπ [MeV]ms/mlNτ =820 16027 14040 11080 80160 55Fig. 4.4.3 Quark mass dependence of chiral order parameter,M, defined in Eq. 4.4.14 for QCD with two degenerate lightquark masses and a strange quark mass tuned to its physicalvalue. Shown are results from calculations on lattices with tem-poral extent Nτ = 8 performed for several values of the lightquark masses [442, 443]. The light quark masses,mℓ, are ex-pressed in units of the strange quark mass,H = mℓ/ms. In thefigure we give1/H = ms/mℓ together with the correspondingvalues of the Goldstone pion mass.
the chiral phase transition is second order for allnf ≤6[444].
In Fig. 4.4.4 (top) we show the original version ofthe QCD phase diagram in the plane of two degeneratelight (mℓ) and strange (ms) quark masses, proposedin 1990 [445], together with an updated version from2021 [444]. Heremℓ denotes the two degenerate up anddown quark masses, mℓ ≡mu = md. This sketch ofourcurrentunderstandingofthe3-flavorphasediagramalso is supported by the increasing evidence for a non-singular crossover transition in QCD with physical lightand strange quark masses and the absence of any evi-dence for a first order phase transition at lighter-than-physical values of the light and strange quark masses[444, 446]. In the chiral limit,i.e. for vanishing up anddown quark masses11, a second order phase transitionwill then occur.
4.4.4 The chiral phase transition at non-vanishingchemical potentialThe occurrence of the chiral phase transition is signaledby the vanishing of the light quark chiral condensate. Inorder to remove multiplicative and additive divergencesin ⟨¯χχ⟩ℓ one considers instead the order parameterMwhich is a combination of light and strange quark con-densates,M = 2(ms⟨¯ψψ⟩ℓ −mℓ⟨¯ψψ⟩s)/f4K , (4.4.14)11 Lattice QCD studies of the (2+1)-flavor phase diagramgenerally are performed with degenerate up and down quarkmasses.82 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.4.4 Sketch of the phase diagram of QCD in the planeof degenerate, light up and down quark masses and a strangequark mass (Columbia plot). The figure shows the original ver-sion from 1990 [445] (top) and an updated version from 2021[444] (bottom).
anditsderivativewithrespecttothelightquarkmasses,i.e. the chiral susceptibilityχMχM = ms(∂M∂mu+ ∂M∂md)mu=md≡mℓ. (4.4.15)Here the kaon decay constantfK = 156.1(9)/√2 MeV,has been used to introduce a dimensionless order pa-rameter. The scaling behavior ofM and χM, have beenused to characterize the chiral phase transition,M ∼mℓ →0A(T0c−TT0c)β, T T0c(4.4.17)where β, γare critical exponents.
We note that the low temperature behavior of theorder parameter susceptibility, χM, is quite differentfrom that known, for instance, in the3-d Ising model.
The susceptibility diverges in the massless limit at all 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 130 135 140 145 150 155 160 165 170 175 180χ MT [MeV]mπ [MeV]ms/mlNτ =820 16027 14040 11080 80160 55Fig. 4.4.5 same as Fig.4.4.3 but for the chiral susceptibility.
values of the temperature, T ≤T0c. This is a conse-quence of the breaking of a continuous rather than adiscrete symmetry. The former gives rise to Goldstonemodes, the pions in QCD, which contribute to the chi-ral condensate and as such to the order parameterM,i.e.,M ∼a(T)√mℓ , T  1/2 in all relevantuniversality classesχM develops a pronounced peak atsmall, but non-zero values of the quark masses,χpeakM ≡χM(Tpc(H)) ∼H1/δ−1 , H= mℓ/ms .
(4.4.20)The location of such a peak in eitherχM or similarly inT∂M/∂T ,definespseudo-criticaltemperatures, Tpc(H),which converge to the unique chiral phase transition,T0c, at H = 0 . Some results on the quark mass de-pendence of M and χM are shown in Figs.4.4.3 and4.4.5, respectively. A scaling analysis of these observ-ables, performed in [442], led to the determination ofthe chiral phase transition temperature [442],T0c = 132+3−6 MeV . (4.4.21)Similar results have also been obtained in [447] wherea quite different discretization scheme for the fermionsector of QCD has been used.
For physical light and strange quark masses, corre-sponding to H ≃1/27, one finds as a pseudo-criticaltemperature [448],Tpc = 156.5(1.5) MeV , (4.4.22)4.4 QCD at non-zero temperature and density 83which is in good agreement with other determinationsof pseudo-critical temperatures in(2 + 1) -flavor QCD[449–451].
The chiral symmetry groupSU(2)L×SU(2)R is iso-morphic to the rotation groupO(4). It thus is expectedthat the chiral phase transition for two vanishing lightquark masses is in the same universality class as3-d,O(4) symmetric spin models. In fact, the rapid rise ofχM, shown in Fig. 4.4.5, is consistent with a criticalexponent in this universality class, δ = 4 .824 [452].
However, a precise determination of this exponent in2-flavor QCD is not yet possible. This leaves open thepossibility for other symmetry breaking patterns andother universality classes playing a role in the chirallimit of 2-flavor QCD [453]. In fact, the discussion ofsuch possibilities is closely related to the yet unsettledquestion concerning the influence of the axial U(1)Asymmetry on the chiral phase transition. For a recentreview on this question see, for instance [454].
Thermal masses and screening massesThe restoration of symmetries is reflected also in themodification of the hadron spectrum at non-zero tem-perature.Interactionsinathermalmediumleadtomod-ifications of resonance peaks that can modify the loca-tion of maxima and the width of spectral functions thatcontrol properties of hadron correlation functions. Thisgives rise to so-called thermal masses as well as thermalscreening masses that control the long-distance behav-ior of hadron correlation functions in Euclidean timeand spatial directions, respectively.
A consequence ofU(1)A breaking in the vacuum orat low temperature is that masses of hadronic statesthat are related to each other through aU(1)A trans-formation differ, while they become identical, or closeto each other, when theU(1)A symmetry is effectivelyrestored. This is easily seen to happen at high temper-ature. The crucial question, of relevance for the QCDphase transition, however, is to which extent U(1)Asymmetry breaking is reduced, or already disappearedat the chiral phase transition temperature. Settling thisquestion requires the analysis of observables sensitiveto U(1)A breaking close to T0c and for smaller-than-physical light quark masses.
Thecalculationofin-mediummodifactionsofhadronmasses is difficult, but has been attempted for quarkmasses close to their physical values [455]. Results forthe temperature dependence of the mass-splitting ofparity partners in the baryon octet [455] are shown inFig. 4.4.6. These results suggest a strong temperaturedependence of the negative parity states while the pos-itive parity partners are not sensitive to temperature11.21.41.6N(−)N(+)Σ(−)Σ(+)0 50 100 150T [MeV]11.21.4m(T)/m+(T0)Λ(−)Λ(+)0 50 100 150Ξ(−)Ξ(+)S=0 S=−1S=−1 S=−2octet (spin 1/2)Fig. 4.4.6 Temperature dependence of masses of parity part-ners in the baryon octet [455].
0.95 1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15 1.20 1.25 1.30 1.35100150200250300350400450500550600650700750800850 ¯udms/mlT/Tpc,cont.(ms/ml)mscr.[MeV]27 a027 π40 a040 π80 a080 π0.95 1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15 1.20 1.25 1.30 1.350100200300400500600700800900 ¯udms/mlT/Tpc,cont.(ms/ml)m2s(χπ −χa0)/f4K274080Fig. 4.4.7Screening masses (top) and the related susceptibil-ities (bottom) of scalar and pseudo-scalar mesons [456, 457].
changes. At Tpc the masses of parity partners are al-most degenerate.
Moreeasilyaccessibleareso-calledscreeningmasses,which also are obtained from ordinary hadron correla-tion functions and can be analyzed close to the chirallimit. Rather than analyzing the long-distance behav-ior of hadron correlation functions in Euclidean time,one extracts a so-called screening mass from the long-distance behavior in one of the spatial directions [458,459]. Finite temperature meson screening correlators,projected onto lowest Matsubara frequency of a bosonic84 4 LATTICE QCDstate, p0 ≡ω0 = 0 , and zero transverse momentum,p⊥ ≡(px,py) = 0 , are defined byGΓ(z,T ) =∫ β0dτ∫dxdy⣨MΓ(⃗ r,τ)MΓ(⃗0,0)⟩∼z→∞ e−mΓ(T)z , ⃗ r≡(x,y,z ) , (4.4.23)where MΓ ≡ ¯ψΓψ is a meson operator that projectsontoaquantumnumberchannelthatisselectedthroughan appropriate choice ofΓ-matrices [456, 458]. At largedistances this permits the extraction of the screeningmass, mΓ, in the quantum number channel selected byΓ from the exponential fall-off of these correlation func-tions. In Fig.4.4.7 (left) we show results for the scalarand pseudo-scalar screening masses obtained in(2+1) -flavor QCD calculations for different values of the lightto strange quark mass ratio. The integrated correlationfunctions define susceptibilities in these quantum num-ber channels, which also should be degenerate, ifU(1)Ais effectively restored. Both observables seem to sug-gest that there remains a significant remnant ofU(1)Abreaking at the chiralphase transition temperature,T0c,which however reduces quickly above the chiral transi-tion and gives rise to an effective restoration ofU(1)Aat T ≃1.1T0c.
In the regionT >T0c the difference between pseudo-scalar and scalar susceptibilities is related to the so-called disconnected part,χdis, of the chiral susceptibil-ity,χM = χdis + χcon, withχdis = 14NτN3σ(⟨(TrM−1ℓ )2⟩−⟨TrM−1ℓ ⟩2), (4.4.24)χcon = 12NτN3σ⟨TrM−2ℓ ⟩. (4.4.25)The disconnected chiral susceptibility can be expressedby an integral over the eigenvalue density,ρ(λ), of thefermion matrixMf,χdis =∫ ∞0dλρ(λ) 2m2ℓ(λ2 + m2ℓ)2 . (4.4.26)In the chiral symmetric phase the density of vanish-ing eigenvalues,ρ(0), vanishes. In order forχdis to benonetheless non-zero in the chiral limit, the density ofnear-zeroeigenvaluesneedstoconvergetoanon-vanish-ing value (δ-function) atλ= 0 in the limitmℓ →0 andV → ∞. Controlling the various limits involved andalso taking into account that the pseudo-critical tran-sition temperature, Tpc(H), has a sizeable quark massdependence is difficult. Nonetheless, studies of the tem-perature dependence of the eigenvalue density of theDirac matrix are crucial for a detailed understanding ofthe influence of theU(1)A anomaly on the QCD phasetransition. Not surprisingly, it turns out that at non-zero values of the lattice spacing the spectrum of lowlying eigenvalues is quite sensitive to the fermion dis-cretization scheme. Using fermions with good chiralityeven at non-zero lattice spacing seems to be advanta-geous, although after having performed the extrapola-tion to the chiral limit, they should lead to results iden-tical with those obtained, e.g. within the staggered dis-cretization scheme. Current results are ambiguous. Weshow in Fig.4.4.8 results from a calculation of eigen-value distributions obtained from calculations with dy-namical overlap fermions [460, 461]. These calculationsprovide evidence for a large density of near-zero eigen-valuesandanon-zeroeigenvaluedensity,possiblybuild-ing up at λ = 0 . This is in contrast to calculationsperformed with domain wall fermions [462] as well asso-called partially quenched calculations that use theoverlap fermion operator to calculate eigenvalue distri-butionsongaugefieldconfigurationsgeneratedwithdy-namical staggered fermions [463]. Obviously this subtleaspect of the chiral phase transition is not yet resolvedand the analysis ofU(1)A restoration will remain to bea central topic in finite temperature QCD in the yearsto come.
4.4.5 The chiral phase transition at vanishing chem-ical potentialInthestudiesofQCDatnon-vanishingbaryonchemicalpotential the search for the existence of a second orderphase transition at physical values of the quark masses,the critical end point (CEP), finds particular attention.
It separates the crossover regime at small values of thechemical potential from a region of first order phasetransitions, which is predicted in many phenomenologi-Fig. 4.4.8 Eigenvalue density of the overlap fermion matrixobtained in calculations with dynamical overlap fermions [460].4.4 QCD at non-zero temperature and density 85Tµ Bmu,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T pcAAAC0XicjVFNS8NAEH3G7++qN70URfBUUj3oUfzCi6BoVbBSNulaQ5NsSLZiDQHxqr/Dq/4Ur/4Nzx58Wauggjohmdk3b15mZ5zI9xJt289dVndPb1//wODQ8Mjo2HhhYvIwUa3YlRVX+So+dkQifS+UFe1pXx5HsRSB48sjp7me548uZJx4KjzQ7UieBqIRemeeKzShWmG66ii/nrQDuvSglla1vNRp5GZZVivM2SXbWPFnUO4Ec6szL2v9w3evu6rwhCrqUHDRQgCJEJqxD4GEzwnKsBERO0VKLGbkmbxEhiHWtsiSZAiiTX4bPKWMFTmK/AyDmEcRW6baIT//g2Sc0L/yvTJY4xc1wc7ybtr0zqfiDnGNczL+qgw6zIxV/6s8IapxhhVzb4/9RQbJ5+N+6mwwExNrmkwRm4bZoIZjzhecQEhfYQf5RD8UiubGdXphvDQqYUdRUC+mzyfNfrjS8vcF/gwOF0vlpdLiHne7gncbwAxmscANLmMV29hlHy6ucY8HPFr7Vtu6tm7eqVZXp2YKX8y6fQPpoJlfT 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. 4.4.9 Sketch of a possible QCD phase diagram in thespace of temperature (T), baryon chemical potential (µB) andlight quark masses (mu,d).
cal models to exist at high density. The CEP is searchedfor extensively in heavy ion experiments and, if con-firmed, would provide a solid prediction for the exis-tence of first order phase transitions in dense stellarmatter, e.g. in neutron stars.
The dependence of the transition temperature onthe chemical potentials, e.g.Tpc(µB), can be deducedfrom the µB-dependent shift of the peak in the chiralsusceptibility. At non-vanishing values of the baryonchemical potential,µB, the QCD phase transition tem-perature in the chiral limit as well as the region ofpseudo-critical behavior in QCD with its physical quarkmass values shifts to smaller values of the temperature.
This shift has been determined in calculations withimaginary values of the chemical potentials as well asfrom Taylor series expansions of the order parameterMand its susceptibilityχM. Using a Taylor series ansatzfor Tpc(µB),Tc(µB) = T0c(1 −κB2(µBT0c)2−κB4(µBT0c)4)(4.4.27)one finds for the curvature coefficientsκB2 ≃0.012 whilethe next correction is consistent with zero in all cur-rent studies, e.g.κB4 = 0 .00032(67) [451]. The pseudo-critical temperature Tpc at physical values of the lightand strange quark masses thus drops to about 150 MeVat µB ≃ 2Tpc. This is still considerably larger thanthechiralphasetransitiontemperature, T0c,determinedat µB = 0 . As various model calculations [464, 465]suggest that the CEP at non-zeroµB is located at atemperature below T0c one thus needs to get access tothermodynamics at large chemical potentials. Assum-ing that the curvature of the pseudo-critical line doesnot change drastically at large values of the chemicalpotentials,ourcurrentunderstandingoftheQCDphasediagram in themℓ-T-µB space (see Fig.4.4.9) suggeststhat a possible CEP in the phase diagram may existonly at a temperature,TCEP(µCEPB ) <130 MeV , µCEPB >400 MeV .
(4.4.28)Reaching the regionµB/T >3 is a major challenge forany of the currently used approaches in lattice QCDcalculations as well as for collider based heavy ion ex-periments that search for the CEP.
4.4.6 Equation of state of strongly interactingmatterTheequationofstate(EoS)ofstronglyinteractingmat-ter, i.e. the pressure and its derivatives with respect totemperature and chemical potentials provides the ba-sic information on the phase structure of QCD. It is ofcentral importance not only for the analysis of criticalbehavior in QCD but also for the analysis of experimen-tal results on strong interaction thermodynamics thatare obtained in relativistic heavy ion collision experi-ments.
At vanishing values of the chemical potentials theQCD EoS is well controlled and consistent results forpressure, energy and entropy densities, as well as de-rived observables such as the speed of sound or spe-cific heat, have been obtained by several groups [466,467]. We show results for some of these observables inFig. 4.4.10. The figure on the right shows the squareof the speed of sound, c2s, as function of the energydensity. It can be seen thatc2s has a minimum in thetransition region, sometimes called the softest point ofthe QCD EoS [469]. The energy density in the vicinityof the pseudo-critical temperature (Tpc ≃155 MeV) isfound to be,ϵc ≃(350 ±150) MeV /fm3 , (4.4.29)which is compatible with the energy density of the nu-cleon,mN/(4πr3N/3) fornucleonradiiintherange rN =(0.8 −1) fm. Also shown in the top figure is the traceof the energy-momentum tensor,(ϵ−3P)/T4. Its de-viation from zero gives some hint to the relevance ofinteractions in the medium (for an ideal gas as well asto leading order in high temperature perturbation the-ory one has ϵ = 3 P). Not unexpected this is largestclose to the transition region and decreases only slowlyin the high temperature regime. This large deviationsfrom ideal gas or perturbative behavior is seen in manyobservables at temperatureTpc  fmLHPC17PACS18PACS21ETM18ETM20PNDME20NME21Mainz210.6 0.8 1.0< r2M > fmFig. 4.6.3 Lattice results for charge magnetic radii of the nu-cleon. The vertical bands are the estimates from experiment(see text for details).
radii also exist. Lattice QCD calculation results for themagnetic and the charge isovector radius of the nucleonare presented in Fig4.6.3. In this figure, the magentaright triangles are PNDME20 [571] using the mixed ac-tions with Clover on HISQ, and the green triangles arefrom ETM18/20 [576, 578] using the twisted-mass ac-tion. Calculations using the Clover fermion action arerepresentedbythemaroonoctagons[ 575]fromMainz21,the blue diamonds from PACS18/20 [577, 579], the redcircle is from LHPC17, and the magenta left trianglesfrom NME21 [570]. Note that results from [578, 579]are obtained with methods that directly estimate theslope of the form factor atQ2 = 0 . The vertical bandsrepresent the phenomenological values for the radii ob-tained from the experiment by combining data fromthe proton and the neutron. In particular the isovectorcharge rivE and magneticrivM radii are given byrivE =√r2Ep −r2En , rivM =√µpr2Mp −µnr2Mnµp −µn,(4.6.12)wherer2Ep,r2En are the proton and neutron charge radii,r2Mp, r2Mn are the proton and neutron magnetic radii,and µp, µn are the proton and neutron magnetic mo-ments. By combining results exclusively from the par-ticle data group (PDG) [278] we obtain the red bands.
For the charge radius, the cyan band is obtained byusing the CODATA2018 value for the proton chargeradius and the neutron charge radius from the recentwork in [580]. The cyan band for the magnetic radiuswas obtained using the proton radius obtained by [581]and the rest of the needed quantities from PDG.98 4 LATTICE QCDIn the case of the isovector axial form factors, onecan take τ+ as the flavor matrix andΓ = iγ5γµ andthe resulting matrix element is⟨s,⃗ p|¯q(iγ5γµτ+)q|s′,⃗ p′⟩= ¯U(⃗ p)[FA(Q2) + qµMγ5FP(Q2)]U(⃗ p′) , (4.6.13)withFA andFP being the corresponding invariant formfactors. In Fig4.6.4, recent lattice QCD computations0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00Q2/ GeV20.40.60.81.01.2FA(Q2)νD zexpNME 21RQCD 20Mainz 21CalLat 21PACS 21PACS 18 erratumETMC 20LHPC 17Fig. 4.6.4 Lattice QCD results for the nucleon axial formfactor compared to the experimental results from neutrinodeuteron scattering. Figure from Ref. [569] and reprinted underthe terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-tional license.
of the axial form factor are presented. The red band de-notes the parametrized experimental results from neu-trino deuteron scattering [582]. The purple band are re-sults from NME21 [570], and the green band are resultsfrom RQCD20 [583], where continuum, chiral and finitevolume extrapolations have been performed. The restcontain results [577,579,584–587] from a few ensemblesand are presented as points without the interpolatingcurves. It is clear that although there is tension betweenlattice QCD results and experiment, lattice QCD cal-culations are consistent with each other. As it is arguedin Ref. [569] that lattice QCD calculations of axial nu-cleon form factors may play an essential role in futureexperiments and thus help us better understand neu-trino physics.
4.6.3 Partonic StructureInformation on the internal structure of hadrons is ob-tained through their partonic content, particularly par-ton PDFs, GPDs, and TMDs (see Sec.10). These quan-tities are light-cone correlation functions and cannot becalculated using the Euclidean formulation of latticeQCD due to the rotationt →iτ. The most commonavenue to proceed is to calculate Mellin moments ofdistribution functions, which provide partial informa-tion on distribution functions.
Lattice QCD calculations have focused on protoncharges, vector, and axial form factors, that are, thefirst Mellin moments of PDFs and GPDs, respectively.
There are also limited studies of the scalar and tensorcharges, as well as the second Mellin moments of PDFsand GPDs.
In theory, one can use a large number of Mellinmoments to reconstruct the parton distributions us-ing an operator product expansion (OPE). Practically,a proper and exact reconstruction is not possible dueto the challenges of calculating reliably high moments;the signal-to-noise rapidly decreases, and an unavoid-able power-law mixing occurs beyond the fourth mo-ment[588–592].Therefore,alternativemethodsareneededto obtain the x dependence of distribution functionsfrom a Euclidean formulation. The realization that ma-trix elements of momentum-boosted hadrons coupledwithbilinearnon-localoperatorscanberelatedtolight-cone distributions has transformed the field of PDF,GPDs, and TMDs calculations. The pioneering methodof Large-Momentum Effective Theory (LaMET) thatusestheaforementionednon-localoperatorshasrenewedthe interest of the community to access thex depen-dence of parton distributions. Over the years, therehave been several methods proposed: a technique basedon the hadronic tensor [593–595], auxiliary quark fieldapproaches [596–598], a method to obtain high Mellinmoments using smeared operators [599], LaMET [600,601],pseudo-ITD[ 602],current-currentcorrelators[ 603–605], and a method based on OPE [606].
In this review, we highlight selected results demon-strating the field’s progress. More details can be foundin the recent reviews [607–611].
Isovector PDFsThe isovector leading-twist PDFs have been the mostwell-studied and serve as a benchmark of the variousmethodologiestoextract xdependencefromlatticedata.
Results with ensembles at physical quark masses havealready been obtained for the unpolarized [612–615],helicity [612, 613, 616] and transversity [613, 617, 618]PDFs for the proton. Here we focus on the unpolarizedcase that has the most results allowing comparison be-tween different methods and lattice formulations. Thework of Ref. [613] uses a twisted-mass fermions ensem-ble with physical pion mass and employs the quasi-PDFs method. The lattice spacing is about 0.09 fm,and the nucleon momentum boost is up to 1.4 GeV.
The unpolarized PDF of Ref. [614] has been obtainedusing the pseudo-ITD framework on three clover Wil-son ensembles with pion mass 172, 278, and 358 MeV;4.6 Hadron structure 99a chiral extrapolation has been performed to get thephysical point. The pseudo-ITD methodology computesthe Lorentz invariant amplitudes that contribute to thenon-local matrix element and isolates the amplitudethat contains the leading twist contribution. This am-plitude is a function of the so-called Ioffe timeν, whichis the Fourier-dual of the momentum fractionx [619–621]. The analysis of [614] includes lattice data up toIoffe time ν = 8 for the near-physical mass ensemble.
Finally, the work of Ref. [615] extends and reanalyzesthe data of Ref. [613] within the pseudo-ITD frameworkwith up to ν = 8 . Having three independent calcula-tions of the unpolarized PDF allows one to comparethem and understand potentially systematic effects re-lated to the method and computational setup. Such acomparison can be found in Ref. [614], which we includein Fig. 4.6.5. A good agreement is observed betweenthe different calculations, which is very encouraging, aseach methodology may suffer from different systematiceffects.
Gluon PDFsIn general, gluon contributions are limitedly studieddue to the enhanced gauge noise, the involvement ofdisconnected diagrams, and the challenges in the non-perturbativerenormalization.Inthecaseof x-dependentgluon PDFs, the renormalization cancels out using thepseudo-ITD method, which is a significant advantage.
Recently,therehavebeencalculationsofthegluonPDFfortheprotonandthepionusingthepseudo-ITDmethod[ 622,623].Ref.[ 622]presentsacalculationusingcloverfermionsat a pion massmπ = 358 MeV . One novelty of the cal-culation is the use of the momentum-smeared distilla-tion technique [624] to suppress gauge noise. The work0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1012345xqv(x)HadStruc ’20ETMC ’18ETMC ’20Fig. 4.6.5 Lattice results for the unpolarized PDF usingquasi-PDFs [613] (red band) and pseudo-ITDs from Ref. [614](gray band) and Ref. [615] (blue band). Plot from Ref. [614].
Reprinted under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-tion 4.0 International license.
also employs Jacobi polynomials to reconstruct thexdependence of the distribution [625]. The main resultsare shown in Fig.4.6.6. The work of Ref. [623] presentsa calculation of the gluon PDF for the pion using twoHISQ coarse ensembles (a = 0 .12,0.15 fm) and pionmassesmπ = 220, 310, 690 MeV.Whilethecurrentsta-tus of gluon PDFs is exploratory, the available resultsare promising.
Individual quark PDFsCalculations of individual-quark PDFs are challengingdue to the involvement of disconnected diagrams thatincreases the statistical fluctuations of the correlators.
The flavor decomposition of quark PDFs is interestingin its own right but is also needed to form the flavor-singlet combination to eliminate mixing with the gluonPDF. The mixing holds only for the unpolarized andhelicity cases; there is no gluon transversity. Further-more, the strange and charm quark PDFs are moresusceptible to mixing as they enter the sea sector fromgluon splitting. The effect of mixing is expected to besmaller for the light quarks that appear in the valencesector of the proton. The individual light quark un-polarized, helicity, and transversity PDFs were calcu-lated in Refs. [629, 630] using an ensemble of twistedmass fermions at mπ = 260 MeV. The work showsthat disconnected contributions to the unpolarized andtransversity PDFs are tiny and can be neglected. How-ever, calculations at the physical value of the quarkmasses are needed to confirm this. Refs. [629, 630] in-clude the strange quark contributions, which may haveincreased systematic effects due to the mixing with thegluon PDFs. The same holds for Ref. [631] (clover onHISQ, mπ = 220 , 310, 690 MeV), which calculates thestrange and charm quark PDFs for the proton.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0x0.01.02.03.04.0xg(x) 2 - param(Q) NNPDF3.1 CT18 JAM20Fig. 4.6.6 Lattice QCD results on the gluon PDF fromRef. [622] (cyan band) compared to estimates from global anal-yses [626–628]. Reprinted under the terms of the Creative Com-mons Attribution 4.0 International license.100 4 LATTICE QCD0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1x 01234H ( x ; 0 ; ! 0 : 6 9 G e V 2 ) e H ( x ; 0 ; ! 0 : 6 9 G e V 2 ) H T ( x ; 0 ; ! 0 : 6 9 G e V 2 ) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1x 00.20.40.60.81H ( x ; 1 = 3 ; ! 1 : 0 2 G e V 2 ) e H ( x ; 1 = 3 ; ! 1 : 0 2 G e V 2 ) H T ( x ; 1 = 3 ; ! 1 : 0 2 G e V 2 ) Fig. 4.6.7 Top: H, ˜H, HT GPDs t = −0.69 GeV2, ξ = 0 .
Bottom: H, ˜H, HT GPDs t= −1.02 GeV2, ξ = 1 /3. The un-polarized, helicity, and transversity data are shown with red,yellow, and purple bands, respectively. Figure from Ref. [633]and reprinted under the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-bution 4.0 International license.
GPDsAnother progress for lattice QCD is related to calcu-lating x-dependent GPDs. These are computationallymoreexpensivethanPDFsduetothemomentumtrans-fer between the initial and final hadronic states. Themomentum transfer must be equally split between theinitial and final states, as the GPDs are defined inthe symmetric frame; such a frame is computationallycostly, preventing the extraction of GPDs for a denseset of values oft. A novel approach that related light-cone GPDs to Lorentz-invariant amplitudes has beenrecently proposed [632]. First results on the proton un-polarized and helicity GPDs have been obtained us-ing the quasi-distribution approach [629]. The calcula-tion is performed on a 260 MeV pion mass ensemble oftwisted mass fermions. The work was extended for thechiral odd twist-2 GPDs in Ref. [633]. In Fig.4.6.7, wecompare the three types of GPDs for zero and nonzeroskewness. As can be seen, the introduction of nonzeroskewness leads to the appearance of a nontrivial ERBLregion. Another calculation of the unpolarized GPDscanbefoundinRef.[ 634],whichwasoriginallyreportedin a non-symmetric frame similar to the one used forframe-independent form factors.
□ □□ □□ □□ □▽ ▽ ▽ ▽▽ ▽ ▽ ▽ ▽ ▽▲ ▲▲▲▲△△△△△● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○○ ○ ○◆ ◆◆ ◆◆◇ ◇ ◇ ◇◇◇○△▽◇□0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5-1.5-1.0-0.50.0Fig. 4.6.8 Lattice QCD determinations of the Collins-Soperevolution kernel obtained from Ref. [635] (SWZ 20), Ref. [636](LPC 20), Ref. [637] (Regensburg/NMSU 21), and Ref. [638](ETMC/PKU 21), and Ref. [639] (SWZ 21). Figure adaptedfrom Ref. [639] and reprinted under the terms of the CreativeCommons Attribution 4.0 International license.
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9012345678Fig. 4.6.9The Wandzura-Wilczek approximation forgT. Fig-ure from Ref. [640] and reprinted under the terms of the Cre-ative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.
TMDsUnlike PDFs and GPDs, TMDs contain, in addition, ra-pidity divergences that require regularization. The reg-ulator is encapsulated within the so-called soft func-tion. The evolution in rapidity of the soft function canbe studied separately through the Collins-Soper (CS)kernel. Aspects of the soft function are actively studiedin lattice QCD [631, 635–639, 641], which is the idealformulation as the soft-function is a non-perturbativequantity. A summary plot for the CS kernel is shown inFig. 4.6.8.
Higher-twistOneofthelatestdevelopmentsinextracting x-dependentdistributionfunctionsistheexplorationoftwist-3PDFsand GPDs that contain information on quark-gluon-quark correlations [642]. They are also related to thetransverse force acting on transversely polarized quarks[643] and to the nuclear electric dipole moments [644].
First exploratory studies of twist-3 PDFse(x), gT(x),and hL(x) can be found in Refs. [640, 645–647], with4.7 Weak matrix elements 101numerical results forgT(x) and hL(x). An interestinginvestigation of twist-3 PDFs is the Wandzura-Wilczek(WW)approximation[ 648]accordingtowhichthetwist-3 gT can be fully determined by its twist-2 counterpart,g1. The WW approximation can also be studied forhL.
In Fig.4.6.9 one can seegWWT , demonstrating that theapproximation holds in some regions ofx, but an over-all violation of up to 40% is permitted. Note that the2-parton twist-3 PDFs mix with quark-gluon-quark cor-relations and the mixing should be addressed within thematching kernel [649, 650].
4.6.4 OutlookSince the early days of lattice QCD in the 1980s, hadronstructurecalculationshavebeenpursuedvigorously.Overthe years, the methods used to perform these calcu-lations have improved steadily, and the Monte Carlomethods for sampling the QCD vacuum have reachedthe degree of efficiency required for such computations.
Furthermore, computer hardware has now reached theExaflop era. As a result, calculations for hadron struc-ture are now achieving unprecedented precision in somecases (ex., nucleon charges). In other cases, new hori-zons open up, such as the ability to compute the mo-mentumfractionx-dependenceofdistributionfunctions.
In the future, lattice QCD computations of hadronicstructure will continue to improve and provide us withthe theoretical input needed to understand strong in-teraction physics better.
4.7 Weak matrix elementsChristine DaviesQuarks have the special property that they experienceall of the fundamental forces in the Standard Model. Aswell as exchanging the gluons that keep them confinedintohadrons,quarkscanalsooccasionallyemitweakin-teraction W bosons or QED photons. Because W andγ have no colour charge they escape cleanly from thehadron, carrying valuable information about the struc-ture of the bound state. This structure is determined bystrong interaction physics and so predictions from QCDcanbetestedagainstexperimentalinformationontheseprocesses. The number of different quark flavours, andhadrons constructed from them, makes a rich mine forlattice QCD to work in.
In the bigger picture of the Standard Model we needto determine accurately the couplings between quarksandthe W bosongivenbytheelementsoftheCKMma-trix ([651], Sec.13.2). This programme is a crucial in-gredient in constraining the possibilities for new physicsbeyond the Standard Model. However, quarks are notfree particles when they emitW bosons. The experi-mental measurement of appropriate hadronic weak de-cay rates allows us to determine CKM elements butonly if, as discussed above, we have understood thestronginteractionphysicsthatconfinesthequarksthro-ugh calculation of the appropriatehadronic matrix ele-ments of the weak current. As we will see below, some oftheexperimentalinformationforweak(andelectromag-netic) decay rates is very accurate and correspondinglyaccurate theoretical calculations in QCD are needed tomake the most of it. These have always been a highpriority for lattice QCD. Results have improved overtime to the point where uncertainties are now below1% in some cases. We will discuss the current statusbelow, and briefly mention developments that will leadto improvements in future.
4.7.1 Decay constantsDecay constants are the hadronic parameters that en-code the amplitude for finding the valence quark andanti-quark of a meson at the same point. This is thenthe parameter that is needed to determine the rate ofannihilation of mesons with appropriate flavour quan-tum numbers to aW or γ (see Fig.4.7.1). For a pseu-doscalar meson the decay constant,f, is defined fromthe vacuum to meson matrix element of the axial cur-rent. For mesonP of quark contentab⟨0|aγµγ5b|P(p)⟩≡ fPpµ. (4.7.1)For a meson at rest, applying the partially-conservedaxial current (PCAC) relation∂µAµ = (ma+ mb)Ps torelate axial-vector and pseudoscalar currents gives(ma + mb)⟨0|aγ5b|P(⃗ p= 0)⟩= fPM2P , (4.7.2)where MP is the meson mass.
In lattice QCD the matrix element on the l.h.s. ofEqs. 4.7.1 or 4.7.2 is obtained from the two-point cor-relation function between source and sinkab currents(Sec. 4.2) with Euclidean time separation,t, betweenthem. The two-point function has contributions, expo-nential int, from a tower ofabmesons. The exponentialcorresponding to the ground-state (lowest mass) mesondominates at largetand this is the meson for which theparameters of the fit, the amplitude and mass, are mostprecisely determined. This mirrors experiment, whereaccurate meson weak or electromagnetic annihilationrates are possible when strong-interaction decay chan-nels are heavily suppressed (not usually true for excitedstates). Note, however, that lattice QCD can determinef for mesons which do not have the flavour quantum102 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.7.1 Schematic diagram of a meson annihilation to lep-tons via the coupling of the valence quark-antiquark pair to aW or γ. The decay constant parameterises the amplitude tofind the quark and antiquark at a point, the key hadronic in-formation needed to determine the annihilation rate.
numbers to annihilate toW or γ – these results are stilluseful in other contexts.
The fit to the two-point functionC(t) gives both theground-state meson mass and its decay constant. Thecontribution of the ground-state toC(t) isC(t) = a0(e−M0t + e−M0(T−t)) + ... . (4.7.3)Here T is the lattice time extent and... represents con-tributions from higher mass states.M0 is the ground-state meson mass and the amplitudea0 is given bya0 = (⟨0|J|P0⟩)2/(2M0) (4.7.4)where J is the current used at the source and sink ofC(t). The decay constant forP0 can then be obtainedfrom a0 using Eqs.4.7.1 or 4.7.2 as appropriate forJ.
Decay constants for light pseudoscalar mesons (fπand fK) have been calculable in lattice QCD with er-rors at the few percent level since 2004 [652]. This wasone of the first calculations to be done once ensem-bles of gluon field configurations were available (fromthe MILC collaboration) that includedu, d and s seaquarks with multiple values of the lattice spacing andlightenough u/dquarksforareasonablywell-controlledextrapolation to the physical continuum limit.
To achieve a small uncertainty in the result for theground-state meson mass and decay constant it is im-portant to have a large sample of correlators (to achievesmall statistical errors) at multiple values of the latticespacing using a discretisation of the QCD action withsmall discretisation errors (Secs.4.2,4.1). An accuratedetermination of the lattice spacing (to convertC(t)’sfit parameters from lattice units to GeV) is needed. At-tention must also be paid to the effect of the finite-volume of the lattice on theπ and K. Finite-volume(and discretisation) effects are incorporated into thechiral perturbation theory [653] used to fit the resultsas a function ofu/dquark mass (orMπ) to extrapolateto the continuum limit with physical quark masses.MπFig. 4.7.2 The decay constant of the heavy-strange pseu-doscalar meson as a function of its mass from lattice QCD cal-culations [654] using the HISQ action [308]. Points with differ-ent colours are results for different lattice spacing values, withsmaller lattice spacings having more reach to heavier masses.
The grey curve is the continuum limit of an HQET-inspired fitto the results including discretisation effects. The result forfBscan be read off at the mass of theBs meson.
is used to fix the averageu/d quark mass (u and d aretaken to be degenerate in almost all calculations) andthe physical value appropriate to a calculation in whichthe quark electric charges are ignored is the experimen-tal value of theπ0 mass. MK fixes the s quark massand the physical value used is an average of the massesof K0 and K+ with an allowance for QED effects [652].
For decay constants a further important consider-ation is the normalisation of the axial vector currentthat appears in Eq.4.7.1 so that it matches that of thecontinuum QCD current. For lattice QCD actions thathave an exact PCAC relation (such as asqtad staggeredquarksusedin[ 652])norenormalisationisneeded.Ratherthan use the partially conserved axial current (which isa complicated point-split construction) it is easiest touse the pseudoscalar current, which is local, and cal-culate the decay constant directly from Eq.4.7.2. Thequark masses that appear in this expression are thenthe bare lattice quark masses being used in the calcu-lation.
The key physics importance of the lattice QCD cal-culations of fπ and fK is in determining the rate forπ+/K+ annihilation to aW boson, which can be mea-sured accurately in experiment. The annihilation ratefor meson P with appropriate quark flavour quantumnumbers isΓ(P →ℓν) = G2F|Vab|28π f2Pm2ℓMP(1 −m2ℓM2P)2(4.7.5)up to well-studied QED corrections. Only theA of theV −Aweak interaction contributes in this case, so thatΓ ∝f2P. Vab is the appropriate CKM element; this canbe determined from the experimental measurement ofΓ given a value forfP from lattice QCD.4.7 Weak matrix elements 1031.161.171.181.191.21.211.221.23fK+/fπ+fDs /fD+fBs /fB+Fig. 4.7.3 SU(3)-isospin breaking ratios of decay constantsfrom lattice QCD.fK/fπ is from Eq.4.7.6 [63], other resultsfrom Ref. [655].
Several systematic errors are reduced in an analysisof the ratio of widths forK and π [656]. This enablesthe ratio|Vus|/|Vud|to be determined and converted toa result for|Vus|using accurate|Vud|values from super-allowed nuclearβdecay [278]. Lattice QCD calculationshave then largely concentrated on determining the ratiofK/fπ, equivalent to fixing the lattice spacing fromfπ.
Followingagreatdealofworkbythelatticecommunity,current day results have improved to the point wherethe uncertainty on fK+ /fπ+ is reduced to 0.2%. Therecent FLAG review [63] quotes an average offK+ /fπ+ = 1.1932(21) , n f = 2 + 1 + 1 (4.7.6)from lattice QCD results that include u, d, s and cquarks in the sea obtained in Ref. [655, 657–659]. Theaverage is dominated by the result from the FermilabLattice/MILC collaborations [655]. The lattice calcula-tions now include an analysis of the impact of theu/dmass difference; work is ongoing to analyse QED effectson the lattice [660].
Heavier pseudoscalar mesons also annihilate toWs,giving access to other CKM elements. For example, therate forB →ℓν depends on|Vub|and fB. The experi-mental determination of the decay rates is harder andthey currently have larger uncertainties than forK andπ [278]. On the lattice QCD side the heavier masses ofthe c and b quarks increase discretisation errors, sincethey take the form of powers of ma for quark massm. To counteract this lattice QCD theorists must im-prove the discretisation of the QCD (Dirac) action toincrease the power ofma(for ma< 1) with which theseerrors first appear. A very successful action in this re-gard is the Highly Improved Staggered Quark (HISQ)action [308] developed by the HPQCD collaboration,with tree-level discretisation errors starting at(ma)4.
This discretisation allowed the first 1% accurate cal-culations for charmed meson decay constants [666]. Thecurrent state-of-the-art results are from the FermilabLattice/MILC collaborations using HISQ quarks andhave0.3%uncertainties[ 655].Thedominantuncertaintyin the values ofVcs and Vcd from meson leptonic decayis then from the experimental decay rate [278].
For b quarks discretisation errors are even more ofa headache. During the 1990s methods were developedthat exploited the nonrelativistic nature of thebquarkin its bound states, thus removing thebquark mass asa dynamical scale (so that discretisation errors insteaddependonthemuchsmallerscalesofthe bquarkkineticenergy and momentum). These approaches are basedon the discretisation onto a lattice of Heavy Quark Ef-fective theory (HQET) [667] (for ‘heavy-light’ hadrons)and of non-relativistic QCD (NRQCD) [268] (applica-ble also to heavyonium). It was also shown that thelarge-mass limit of the clover-improved Wilson quarkaction [285] could be interpreted as a nonrelativistic ef-fective theory [668]. A limitation of these formalisms isthe need to normalise the weak current to match thatof continuum QCD; this requires challenging calcula-tions in lattice QCD perturbation theory and has onlybeen done throughO(αs) [669–671]. The ETM collab-oration developed a ratio approach [672] to interpolatebetween results for quark masses aroundc using thetwisted mass quark formalism [293] and the infinite-mass (static) limit. These methods have been able toachieve a 2% uncertainty onB decay constants [672,673].
Asincreasedcomputationalpowercouldbeexploitedto generate gluon field configurations with finer val-ues of the lattice spacing, alternative methods becameavailable. The MILC collaboration led the way includ-ing 2 + 1 flavours of asqtad sea quarks with a range oflattice spacing values down toa = 0 .044 fm. On theselattices the HPQCD collaboration showed thatbquarkscould be treated with the relativistic HISQ formalism(with its absolute current normalisation) if calculationswere done for a range of quark masses>mc and a rangeof lattice spacing values [654]. Fig.4.7.2 shows the lat-tice results for the heavy-strange meson along with thejoint fit of the dependence on the heavy meson massand the lattice spacing. This enables a curve for thedependence of the decay constant on the heavy mesonmass to be obtained in the continuum limit, from whichthe decay constant for theBs meson can be read. Atthe same time the dependence on heavy meson massbecomes clear; fDs > fBs but only by about 10%,rather less than the leading order result from HQET,fP√MP = constant [674] would suggest. The FermilabLattice/MILC collaborations have now extended this toB mesons and including2 + 1 + 1 flavours of HISQ seaquarks for uncertainties onfB and fBs below 1% [655].
TheSU(3)-isospin-breakingratioofdecayconstants,fPs/fP, is calculated to better than 0.4% in Ref. [655]with results summarised in Fig.4.7.3. The ratios are104 4 LATTICE QCD00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8π+ ψηcψ′φ Υ ηbΥ′BcB∗cBsB∗sB+B∗ Ds D∗sD+D∗K+DECAY CONSTANT [GeV]Lattice QCD : weak decays: em decays: otherExperiment : weak decays: em decaysFig. 4.7.4 Summary of meson decay constant values calculated in lattice QCD and arranged in order of their size. Points witherror bars use different symbols for values needed to determine weak or QED leptonic decay rates or those not linked to any simpledecay mode. The decay constants inferred from experimental values for QED leptonic decay are given by blue bands. For weakdecays, experimental results must be combined with lattice QCD to obtain CKM elements;fπ can be inferred from theπ+ leptonicrate taking |Vud| from nuclearβ decay [278] and is shown by a purple band at 130.56(14) MeV. The lattice QCD result forfπcomes from RBC/UKQCD [264], using theΩ baryon mass to fix the lattice spacing. Other results shown usefπ to determine thelattice spacing, and so do not give a value for that quantity.fK is taken from Eq.4.7.6; fB, fD, fDs from Ref. [655]; fBc [661],fD∗(s)/fD(s) and fB∗(s)/fB(s) [662]; fB∗c/fBc [663]; fφ [664] and charmonium and bottomonium results [258, 260, 665].
all close to 1.2 but there are small and significant dif-ferences as the mesons increase in mass fromK/π toBs/B.
Vector mesons with appropriate quark flavour quan-tum numbers can also annihilate to leptons via aWboson. Although the decay rate is not suppressed bylepton masses in that case (because of the meson spin)it is nevertheless hard to see experimentally because itis overwhelmed by the QED radiative decayV →Pγ;it may be possible in future for theD∗s [675]. The vectorleptonic decay proceeds through the vector piece of theweak current and is determined by the correspondingvector decay constant. The lattice QCD vector currentmust again be normalised to match continuum QCD.
Although in principle a conserved vector current canbe used, it is easier to use a local vector current andrenormalise it. There are a number of techniques tothis (Sec.4.2). The ratio of vector to pseudoscalar de-cay constants for heavy-light mesons has been calcu-lated using NRQCD [663] (with perturbative renormal-isation [676]) and using twisted-mass quarks [662] (us-ing a MOM scheme [677]). Interestingly it is found thatthe ratio offV/fP is larger than 1 forD mesons andless than 1 forB mesons. Ref. [662] gives 1.078(36) forfD∗/fD and 0.958(22) forfB∗/fB.
Vector qq mesons can annihilate toℓℓ via aγ, andsuch decay rates have been determined experimentallyto better than 2% for heavyonium mesons [278]. Thisprovides an excellent opportunity for accurate compar-ison of lattice QCD and experiment for a decay ratefree from CKM elements sinceΓ(V →ℓ+ℓ−) = 4πα2e2q3f2VMV, (4.7.7)with eq the valence quark electric charge in units ofe. Results forfJ/ψ [258] and fΥ [665] calculated withHISQ quarks, normalised via an SMOM scheme [678,679] show good agreement with values inferred fromthe experimental decay rates, providing a solid under-pinning for the other decay constants being discussedhere.
Fig. 4.7.4 summarises the values of meson decayconstants that are well-determined in lattice QCD, ar-ranged by value order. It does not include values formesons, such as theρ or K∗, that have a large decaywidth from a strong-interaction decay mode (Sec.4.5).
Notice that the range of decay constant values, fromfπ+ = 130 .2(9) MeV [264] tofηb = 724(12) MeV [665]is much smaller than the range of meson masses. Asdiscussed above, decay constants reflect meson inter-nal structure set by momenta inside the bound staterather than quark masses. For mesons containingu/dquarks the range of variation is even smaller, less thana factor of two fromfπ to fD+ = 212 .7(6) MeV [655],and the ordering is not intuitively obvious. Results areshown for decay constants relevant to weak leptonic de-cays (where comparison to experimental results yieldsa determination of the relevant CKM element) as wellas those relevant to QED leptonic decays (where directcomparison to experimental rates is possible). It alsoincludes decay constants that cannot be simply related4.7 Weak matrix elements 105to a decay process, but which nevertheless help to fillin the ‘big picture’ that we now have from lattice QCDfor these simple matrix elements.
4.7.2 Mixing matrix elements and bag parame-tersA fascinating phenomenon for neutralK and Bmesonsis that of ‘oscillations’, induced by the tiny weak inter-action coupling between the mesons and their antipar-ticles. For exact CP invariance the eigenstates of theHamiltonian are then+/−combinations of the strong-interaction P0 and P0states, analogous to the eigen-states of two weakly coupled pendulums. An initialP0beam,createdbyastrong-interactionprocess,isequiva-lent to setting one pendulum swinging. At later times itbecomes clear that the other pendulum is swinging/P0is present (from interrogating the beam via suitable de-cay processes). The oscillation frequency is set by theeigenstate mass difference∆MP and can be measuredvery precisely in experiment. The coupling is a second-order weak process with the short-distance contributiongiven by the ‘box diagram’ of Fig.4.7.5. As such it issensitive to new physics that can be tested with accu-rate matrix elements for the box diagram betweenP0and P0, calculated in lattice QCD.
At the hadronic mass scales of the lattice the boxdiagram shrinks to an effective 4-quark operator (mul-tiplied by a Wilson coefficient). For the SM case, the‘left-left’ operator isO(1) =[hαγµ(1 −γ5)ℓα][hβγµ(1 −γ5)ℓβ]. (4.7.8)h is either s or b and α/β are colour indices. Matrixelements of further (BSM) 4-quark operators have alsobeen calculated, see Ref. [63].
The matrix element of Eq. 4.7.8 between P0 andP0, having a hadron on either end, is much harder todetermine in lattice QCD than a decay constant, soresults are not as mature and have larger uncertainties.
The renormalisation of the 4-quark operator to matchcontinuum QCD is also more challenging. Results aremost usefully presented in terms of ‘bag parameters’ byremoving factors of masses and decay constants fromthe matrix elements that would appear in the ‘vacuumsaturation approximation’, i.e. inserting|0⟩⟨0|betweenthe two halves of the 4-quark operator. ForO(1) thisgives [680]⟨P0|O(1)|P0⟩= 83f2PM2PB(1)P (µ) (4.7.9)where the leftover ‘fudge factor’,BP, is the bag param-eter. It is normally quoted in theMS scheme; note itsWWt t ⌘Fig. 4.7.5 Schematic diagram of the short-distance contribu-tion to neutral meson mixing via the ‘box diagram’ (left) involv-ing W bosons and top quarks. The matrix element that mustbe calculated in lattice QCD is that of the equivalent 4-quarkoperator (right).
0.60.70.80.911.11.21.31.4ˆBKˆBDˆBB ˆBBsFig. 4.7.6 A comparison of RGI bag parameters from latticeQCD for K0, D0, B0 and Bs, showing significant deviationsfrom the naive vacuum saturation approximation estimates of1 and a trend with meson mass.
scale-dependence. Historically the assumption was thenmade thatB ≈1 but lattice QCD can achieve a muchbetter result than this.
The bag parameter is often converted fromB(1)(µ)to its renormalisation-group-invariant (RGI) value,ˆB(1) = cRGIB(1)(µ) (4.7.10)where cRGI is calculated to two-loops in perturbativeQCD [63] and takes values 1.369 forBK (when µ = 2GeV) and 1.516 forBB (when µ= mb)).
Ref. [63] quotes an average for ˆB(1)K = 0 .7625(97)as an average of several lattice QCD results [264, 681–683] using different lattice QCD actions and renormali-sation approaches withnf = 2+1 sea quarks; Ref. [684]gives annf = 2 + 1 + 1 result. B meson results are lessaccurate, because of a significantly worse signal/noiseproblem in the determination of the correlation func-tions [685]; direct determination ofBB rather thanO(1)matrix elements cancels discretisation and light quarkmass effects, however. Results includingnf = 2 + 1 + 1sea quarks are available from HPQCD using NRQCDbquarks(with O(αs) renormalisation[686]),giving ˆB(1)Bd =1.222(61) and ˆB(1)Bs = 1 .232(53)) [685]; nf = 2 + 1 re-sults using other lattice QCD actions are given in [687–689]. Note thatˆBBs/ˆBBd is consistent with 1 (1.008(25)from [685]), showing that the SU(3)-breaking in the 4-quark matrix elements is entirely that of the decay con-stants.106 4 LATTICE QCDFig. 4.7.6 compares the results for ˆB, including avalue for ˆBD [684] that lies betweenˆBK and ˆBB. TheD0 box diagram is mediated by down-type quarks andis expected to contribute only a small part of∆MD,dominated by long-distance contributions. The short-distance results can be used to constrain new physics,however see Ref. [690].
ForB/Bs mesons the box diagram with top quarksof Fig.4.7.5 dominates mixing (sinceVtb ≈1) so that∆Mq = G2FM2WMBq6π2 S0(xt)η2B⏐⏐V∗tqVtb⏐⏐2f2BqˆB(1)Bq ,(4.7.11)and lattice QCD results for the bag parameters canbe combined with (the very accurate) experimental re-sults for the oscillation frequency to determine CKMelements |Vts|and |Vtd|that multiply the effective 4-quark operator. Agreement is seen within2σwith CKMvalues from tree-level weak decays and unitarity [685].
ForK oscillations the situation is more complicatedbecause of sizeable long-distance contributions to∆MKinvolvingu- andc-mediated contributions. At the sametime analysis ofK →ππ amplitudes [63] is also neededto determine the direct and indirect CP-violation pa-rameters, ϵ′ and ϵ that describe the CP-properties ofthe mass eigenstates and their decays. These are veryhard calculations that have required the developmentof new techniques, and results are still at a fairly earlystage, e.g. often only available at one value of the lat-tice spacing. The RBC/UKQCD collaboration has ledthe way here, exploiting the excellent chiral propertiesof the domain-wall quark action. They have calculatedthe amplitude A2 to the isospin 2 two-pion state (the∆I = 3/2 amplitude) [691] and the amplitudeA0 to theisospin 0 state (∆I = 1 /2) [692]. This enables a resultof Ref. [692]ϵ′/ϵ= 21.7(8.4) ×10−4 (4.7.12)in good agreement with experiment (16.6(2.3)×10−4),suggesting no violation of the CKM paradigm at thislevel of accuracy. At the same time the lattice QCD re-sults provide some insight into the observed∆I = 1 /2rule by whichA0 exceeds A2 by a factor of 20. A fac-tor of 2 is provided by perturbative QCD correctionsto the coefficients of the appropriate 4-quark opera-tors; lattice QCD shows that the other factor of 10arises from the fact that, contrary to naive expecta-tions, the contributions from different colour contrac-tions of the dominant operator tend to cancel inA2and reinforce each other inA0 [692, 693]. The develop-ment of methods to determine the long-distance contri-butions to∆MK [694] are also aimed at long-distancecontributions toK+ →π+νν and K →πℓ+ℓ−.
Fig. 4.7.7 Schematic diagram of a meson to meson semilep-tonic decay. The hadronic information needed to determine therate is parameterised by form factors.
Future improvements here require improved renor-malisationtechniquesforlattice4-quarkoperators.Gra-dientflowmethodslookpromisinghere,seee.g.Ref.[ 695].
4.7.3 F orm factorsSemileptonic weak decays of hadrons in which one ofthe constituent quarks changes flavour and the virtualW boson emitted is seen as aℓνl pair (see Fig.4.7.7)provide a huge range of possibilities for determiningCKM elements and understanding hadron structure.
The hadronic parameters that control the rate of theseprocesses are known as form factors and they are func-tions ofq2, the squared 4-momentum transfer from par-ent hadron,ϱ, to child,χ. The kinematic range ofq2 isfrom q2max = ( Mϱ −Mχ)2 (where ℓ and νℓ have maxi-mum back-to-back momentum in theϱrest-frame) to 0(where χand theℓνℓ pair are back-to-back). The formfactors are largest atq2max and fall towardsq2 = 0 , re-flecting the internal momentum transfer via gluon ex-change necessary to achieve the final state configura-tion.
Form factors are defined from matrix elements be-tweenϱand χof weak currents. The simplest situationis when bothϱand χare pseudoscalar mesons. In thatcase only the vector current and vector form factor,f+(q2), contribute to the the decay rate forϱ→χℓν forzero lepton mass, withmℓ-dependent corrections fromthe scalar form factor,f0(q2). We havedΓdq2 = G2F24π3 |Vab|2(1 −ϵ)2 ×[|⃗ pχ|3(1 + ϵ2)|f+(q2)|2 +|⃗ pχ|M2ϱ(1 −M2χM2ϱ)23ϵ8 |f0(q2)|2](4.7.13)for quark transitiona→b, ϵ= m2ℓ/q2, and⃗ pχ is the 3-momentum of childχinϱ’s rest frame. The form factors4.7 Weak matrix elements 107−0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0q2[GeV2]0.6 0.60.8 0.81.0 1.01.2 1.21.4 1.41.6 1.6f0 f+0 .0 0 .5 1.0 1.5q2[GeV2]0 .90 0 .900 .95 0 .951.00 1.001.05 1.051.10 1.10|Vcs|AverageCLEO ’09 (D0 )CLEO ’09 (D+ )BES ’15ABaBar ’06Fig. 4.7.8 (Upper) Data points show lattice QCD results atmultiple values ofq2 and multiple lattice spacings. Blue and redcurves show the final determination off0 and f+ in the contin-uum limit at physical quark masses. (Lower) Bin-by-bin valuesof Vcs from combining these form factors with experimentaldata. The constancy ofVcs shows that theq2 dependence pre-dicted by QCD matches that of experiment [697].
are defined from matrix elements⟨χ|Vµ|ϱ⟩= fϱ→χ+ (q2)[pµϱ + pµχ −M2ϱ −M2χq2 qµ]+fϱ→χ0 (q2)M2ϱ −M2χq2 qµ, (4.7.14)⟨χ|S|ϱ⟩= M2ϱ −M2χma −mbfϱ→χ0 (q2), (4.7.15)with kinematic constraint f+(0) = f0(0). Eq. 4.7.15makes use of the partially conserved vector current rela-tion∂µVµ = (ma−mb)Sthat meansf0 is correctly nor-malised in lattice QCD [696]. The renormalisation fac-tor, ZV, for the vector current can then be determinedby, for example, matching f0(q2max) from Eqs. 4.7.14and 4.7.15 (see Ref. [697]).
To determine the form factors in lattice QCD re-quires the calculation of three-point correlation func-tions with appropriate source and sink operators forparent and child hadrons, and a current insertion atan intermediate time between them. Usually the parenthadron is taken to be at rest on the lattice and differentspatial momenta are given to the child to map out theq2 range. Fitting the three-point correlation function si-multaneously with the two-point correlation functionsfor parent and child allows the parent-to-child matrixelements to be determined and Eqs.4.7.14 and 4.7.15applied. To obtain form factors in the continuum limit,interpolation in q2 and extrapolation to a = 0 andphysical quark masses is needed. Modern calculations(see, for example, Ref. [697]) transformq2 into a regionwithin the unit circle inz-space and then apply a poly-nomial fit inz that allows for discretisation effects andmistuning of quark masses.
The channekK →πℓν is a key for the determina-tion of Vus. The q2 range for this decay is very smalland so conventionally experiment accounts for theq2dependence of Eq.4.7.13 and gives the final result asa value for |Vus|f+(0). Combining charged and neu-tral meson decay rates with QED radiative and strong-isospin-breaking corrections gives a result with 0.2%accuracy :Vusf+(0) = 0 .21635(39)(3) [698], where thefirst, dominant, error is from the experiment and 0.2%accuracy is also now available from lattice QCD with2+1+1flavours.Ref.[ 63]gives f+(0) = 0 .9698(17) fromaveraging [699, 700]. The two lattice QCD calculationstakecontrastingapproaches.Ref.[ 699]determines f+(q2)and f0(q2), interpolating toq2 = 0 and testing q2 de-pendence against experiment; Ref. [700] tunes toq2 = 0using twisted boundary conditions [701] and calculatesf0(0) since this needs no renormalisation. The result forVus from K →πℓν then shows an intriguing 3σtensionwith CKM first row unitarity [698] and 2.5σ tensionwith Vus from K →ℓν [278].
D meson decays (toK or π) have a largerq2 rangeand experimental data is available in bins ofq2. Thisprovides the opportunity to test theq2-dependence pre-dicted by QCD against experiment as well as to deter-mineVcs andVcd.Fig. 4.7.8showshowthisisdone[ 697].
The upper plot shows the determination of thef+ andf0 formfactorsandthelowerplotshowstheresultofde-termining Vcs bin-by-bin inq2 using Eq.4.7.13. A goodfit is obtained to a constant withVcs = 0.9663(80), witherrors from lattice QCD, experiment and QED correc-tions making similar contributions to the total uncer-tainty. See Ref. [702] for a determination ofVcd usinglattice QCDD→π form factors.
The semileptonic decays ofB mesons have a hugepotential in searches for new physics as well as in givingaccess to key CKM elementsVub and Vcb. Form factorsfor these decays are challenging for lattice QCD, how-ever, because the largeb quark mass means a largeq2range. To reach q2 = 0 the child spatial momentummust approximate MB/2. Large values ofa|⃗ p|inducepoor signal/noise in correlation functions as well asdiscretisation effects, so early lattice QCD calculationsworked close toq2max with nonrelativistic formalisms forthe b quark.
To determineVub from B →πℓν, Ref. [63] performsa joint fit to lattice form factor results from Refs. [704,705] (which use different variants of the improved Wil-son action for theb quark and different light quarks)