466 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGcenter-of-mass energy of the LHC means that kinemati-cally a larger rapidity range is available which opens upa window of studies where a separation between diffrac-tive and non-diffractive events is somewhat easier, atleast for what concerns high mass diffraction.
The richness of the data at the LHC also impliesthat there are a number of aspects that we have notbeen able to treat in this short overview. For instance,the interesting topic of particle correlations has notbeen discussed and neither has multiple parton inter-actions been considered (For those topics and also forother topics that have not been discussed here, see e.gPDG [939]).
In the 1970s and 1980s the interest moved fromRegge theory and lowpT physics to highpT reactionsand perturbative QCD. The “old“ physics lost consid-erable interest. However it turns out that the tools ofthe “old” physics work remarkably well also today. Thecurrent theoretical efforts try to bridge this gap be-tween ”old” physics and ”new” and produce convincingdescriptions of soft processes in terms of QCD. A lotof theoretical efforts have occurred over the years try-ing to make the transition from Regge poles and ReggeField Theory to QCD. Some attempts in this directionhave been mentioned in this overview, but far from all.
With the abundant data from LHC available todaythe study of soft interactions has become a more vig-orous field again. The hope is that “old” and “new”physics will meet and that a proper calculational frame-work based upon QCD will be developed in the closefuture leading to a better understanding of soft pro-cesses. A lot of progress have been made until todaybut the challenge is still there to incorporate a full un-derstanding of soft processes in QCD.
13 Weak decays and quark mixingConveners:Andrzej J. Buras and Eberhard KlemptOne of the main frontiers in the elementary particlephysics is the search for new particles and new forcesbeyond those present in the Standard Model (SM) ofparticle physics. As the direct searches at Large HadronCollider(LHC)atCERN,eventenyearsaftertheHiggsdiscovery, did not provide any clue what these new par-ticles and forces could be, the indirect searches for newphysics (NP) through very rare processes caused by vir-tual exchanges of heavy particles gained in importance.
They allow in fact to see footprints of new particles andforces acting at much shorter distance scales than it ispossible to explore at the LHC and presently plannedhigh energy colliders. While the LHC can explore dis-tancescalesasshortas 10−19m,theindirectsearchwiththe help of suitably chosen processes can offer us the in-formation about scales as short as10−21m which can-not be probed even by the planned100 TeV collider atCERN. Also shorter scales can be explored in this man-ner.
In fact rare processes likeKL →µ+µ− known sincetheearly1970simpliedtheexistenceofthecharmquarkprior to its discovery in 1974 as only then its branchingratio could be suppressed in the SM with the help ofthe Glashow-Iliopoulos-Maiani (GIM) mechanism [78],to agree with experiment. Moreover, it was possible topredict successfully its mass with the help of theKL−KS mass difference∆MK in theK0 −¯K0 mixing priorto its discovery [3956]. Similary the size of theB0d−¯B0dmixing115, discovered in the late 1980s, implied a heavytop quark that has been confirmed only in 1995. It isthen natural to expect that this indirect search for NPwill also be successful at much shorter distance scales.
In this context, rare weak decays of mesons play aprominent role besides the transitions between particlesandantiparticlesinwhichflavorsofquarksarechanged.
In particularK+ →π+ν¯ν, KL →π0ν¯ν, KS →µ+µ−,B0s →µ+µ−,B0d →µ+µ− andB0d →K(K∗)ν¯νbutalsoB0s −¯B0s, B0d −¯B0d, K0 −¯K0 mixings and CP-violationin K →ππ, Bd →πK decays among others provideimportant constraints on NP. Most of these transitionsare very strongly loop-suppressed within the SM due tothe GIM mechanism and also due to small elementsVcb,Vub, Vtd and Vts of the CKM matrix [3957, 3958]. Thepredicted branching ratios for some of them are as lowas 10−11. But as the GIM mechanism is generally vio-lated by NP contributions these branching ratios couldin fact be much larger.
Thefirst stepin thisindirect strategyis tosearchforthedeparturesofthemeasurementsofthebranchingra-tios of the decays in question from SM predictions andsimilar for mass differences like∆MK, and analogousmass differences∆Ms and∆Md inB0s−¯B0s andB0d−¯B0dmixings,respectively.Butwhiletheseprocessesaregov-erned by quark interactions at the fundamental level,the decaying objects are mesons, the bound states ofquarks and antiquarks. In particular in the case of non-leptonic transitions likeB0s−¯B0s,B0d−¯B0d,K0−¯K0 mix-ings and CP-violation inK →ππ and B →πK decays,QCDplaysanimportantrole.Itentersatshortdistancescales, where due to the asymptotic freedom in QCDperturbative calculations can be performed, and at longdistance scales where non-perturbative methods are re-115 The B0d = ( d¯b) is listed as B0 in the Review of ParticlePhysics.13.1 Effective Hamiltonians in the Standard Model and Beyond 467quired.QCDhasalsoanimpactonsemi-leptonicdecayslike K+ →π+ν¯ν, KL →π0ν¯ν, B →K(K∗)ν¯ν andeven on leptonic ones likeKS →µ+µ−, B0s →µ+µ−,B0d →µ+µ− and B →K(K∗)ν¯ν. In order to be able toidentify the departures of various experimental resultsfrom the SM predictions that would signal NP at work,the latter predictions must be accurate, and this meansthe effects of QCD have to be brought under control.
But this is not the whole story. To make predictions forrare processes in the SM one has to determine the fourparameters of the unitary CKM matrixVus, V cb, V ub, γ (13.0.1)with γ being the sole phase in this matrix.
This section is divided into five parts. We presentfirst the effective weak Hamiltonians both in the SMand beyond. We summarize briefly the history of the ef-forts to construct them and present their status. Here,renormalization-group (RG) methods - used to calcu-late QCD impact on the Wilson coefficients (WC) of lo-caloperators-areessentialbutalsothenon-perturbativeevaluation of their hadronic matrix elements. This willbe followed bythe discussion of the present status of theCKM matrix (see Section13.2) which will demonstratethe role of QCD in the determination of its elements.
Subsequently, in Section13.3, we will first summarizebriefly the impact of QCD effects on rare leptonic andsemileptonicdecays.Here,theseeffectsaremostlymod-erate, with the exception of radiativeB decays like theone into final states with open strangeness,B →Xsγ,and B →K∗γ. The efforts to calculate QCD correc-tions to B → Xsγ will be briefly described. Subse-quently, two examples will be discussed where the con-trol over non-perturbative contributions is mandatoryto find out whether the SM is able to describe the ex-perimental data or not: the∆I = 1 /2 rule inK →ππdecays and the ratioε′/ε related to the direct CP vio-lation inKL →ππ decays. The last two presentationsdealwiththeroleofQCDinthecontextofthepresentlymost pronounced anomalies in flavor physics: the viola-tion of lepton flavor universality in tree-levelB-mesondecays (Section 13.4) and the departure of data fromthe SM predictions for(g−2)e,µ (Section 13.5).
13.1 Effective Hamiltonians in the Stan-dard Model and BeyondAndrzej J. BurasThebasisforanyseriousphenomenologyofweakdecaysof hadrons is theOperator Product Expansion (OPE)[25, 3959], which allows us to write down the effectiveweak Hamiltonian in full generality simply as followsHeff =∑iCiOSMi +∑jCNPj ONPj ,Ci = CSMi + ∆NPi . (13.1.1)Here– OSMi are local operators present in the SM andONPjare new local operators having typically new Diracstructures, in particular scalar-scalar and tensor-tensor ones.
– Ci and CNPj are the Wilson coefficients (WCs) oftheseoperators.NPeffectsmodifynotonlytheWCsof the SM operators but also generate new operatorswith non-vanishingCNPj .
Examples of operators contributing toK0−¯K0 mix-ing observables in the SM and in any of its extensionsare given as followsQVLL1 = (¯sγµPLd)(¯sγµPLd) , (13.1.2a)QVRR1 = (¯sγµPRd)(¯sγµPRd) , (13.1.2b)QLR1 = (¯sγµPLd)(¯sγµPRd) , (13.1.2c)QLR2 = (¯sPLd)(¯sPRd) , (13.1.2d)QSLL1 = (¯sPLd)(¯sPLd) , (13.1.3a)QSRR1 = (¯sPRd)(¯sPRd) , (13.1.3b)QSLL2 = (¯sσµνPLd)(¯sσµνPLd) , (13.1.3c)QSRR2 = (¯sσµνPRd)(¯sσµνPRd) , (13.1.3d)wherePR,L = 12(1 ±γ5), σ µν = i12[γµ,γν], (13.1.4)and we suppressed color indices as they are summed upineachfactor.Forinstance ¯sγµPLdstandsfor ¯sαγµPLdαand similarly for other factors. OnlyQVLL1 is present inthe SM. For meson decays the number of operators inthe SM is larger. This is also the case for the numberof NP operators. We will encounter some of them inSection 13.3.
The amplitude for a decay of a given mesonM =K,B,.. into a final stateF = µ+µ−, πν¯ν, ππ, DK isthen simply given byA(M →F) = ⟨F|Heff|M⟩= ∑iCi(µ)⟨F|OSMi (µ)|M⟩+ ∑jCNPj (µ)⟨F|ONPj (µ)|M⟩(13.1.5)where ⟨F|Oi(µ)|M⟩are the matrix elements ofOi be-tweenM and F, evaluated at the renormalization scaleµ. The WCs Ci(µ) describe the strength with whicha given operator enters the Hamiltonian. They can beconsidered as scale dependent “couplings” related to468 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXING“vertices” Oi and can be calculated using perturbativemethods as long as the scaleµ is not too small. In thecaseof K0−¯K0 mixing,matrixelements ⟨¯K0|Oi(µ)|K0⟩are present. Other particle-antiparticle mixings havesimilar matrix elements.
The essential virtue of the OPE is this one. It allowsus to separate the problem of calculating the amplitudeA(M →F) into two distinct parts: theshort distance(perturbative) calculation of the coefficientsCi(µ) andthe long-distance (generally non-perturbative) calcula-tion of the matrix elements⟨Oi(µ)⟩. The scaleµ sepa-rates, roughly speaking, the physics contributions intoshort distance contributions contained inCi(µ) and thelong distance contributions contained in⟨Oi(µ)⟩.
It should be stressed that this separation of shortand long distance contribution is only useful due tothe asymptotic freedom in QCD [48, 49] that allowsus to calculate the WCs by means of ordinary or RG-improved perturbation theory. On the other hand, thematrix elements⟨Oi(µ)⟩can only be calculated by non-perturbative methods like numerical Lattice QCD com-putationsandanalyticmethodslikeDualQCD(DQCD)[3960, 3961] and Chiral Perturbation Theory (ChPT)[64, 1570].
Experimentally, theππ system in K →ππ decayswas often found to have isospinI = 0 and rarelyI = 2,an effect which is called∆I = 1 /2 rule; ∆I = 1 /2 de-cays are enhanced over the∆I = 3/2 ones by a factor of22.4. Altarelli and Maiani [1212] and Gaillard and Lee[1211] made a first unsuccessful attempt to explain thishuge enhancement through short distance QCD effects.
The precision of the calculation of the WCs increasedconsiderably in the last fifty years since this first pio-neering calculation. The basic QCD dynamics behindthis rule - contained in the hadronic matrix elements ofcurrent-current operators - has been identified analyt-ically first in 1986 in the framework of the Dual QCDin [3960] with some improvements in 2014 [3961]. Thishas been confirmed more than 30 years later by theRBC-UKQCD collaboration [3962] although the mod-est accuracy of both approaches still allows for some NPcontributions. See [3963] for the most recent summaryand Section13.3.
Now, the coefficientsCi include, in addition to tree-level contributions from the W-exchange, virtual topquarkcontributionsandcontributionsfromotherheavyparticles such as W, Z bosons, charged Higgs particles,supersymmetricparticlesandotherheavyobjectsinnu-merous extensions of this model. Consequently,Ci(µ)generally depend onmt and also on the masses of newparticles if extensions of the SM are considered. Thisdependence can be found by evaluating one-loop dia-grams, so-calledbox and penguin diagrams with full W,Wg,Z,γq qb,s d(a)Z,γq qb,s dW W(b)WWd qb,s qu,c,t(c)Fig. 13.1.1 Penguin and Box Diagrams. From [ 3964].
Z, top quark and new particles exchanges andproperlyincluding short distance QCD effects. The latter gov-ern theµ-dependence ofCi(µ). In models in which theGIM mechanism [78] is absent, alsotree diagrams cancontribute to flavor changing neutral current (FCNC)processes.Thepointisthatagiven Ci generallyreceivescontributions from all these three classes of diagrams.
The value of µ can be chosen arbitrarily but thefinal result must be µ-independent. Therefore the µ-dependence ofCi(µ) has to cancel theµ-dependence of⟨Qi(µ)⟩.Inotherwordsasfarasheavy-mass-independentterms are concerned, it is a matter of choice what ex-actly belongs toCi(µ) and what to⟨Qi(µ)⟩. This can-cellation of theµ-dependence involves generally severalterms in the expansion in Eqn. (13.1.5). Ci(µ) dependalso on the renormalization scheme used in the calcu-lation of QCD effects. This scheme-dependence mustalso be canceled by the one of ⟨Qi(µ)⟩ so that thephysical amplitudes are renormalization-scheme inde-pendent. Again, as in the case of theµ-dependence, thecancellation of the renormalization-scheme-dependenceinvolves generally several terms in the expansion inEqn. (13.1.5). One of the types of scheme-dependenceis the manner in whichγ5 is defined inD = 4 −2ε di-mensions implying various renormalization schemes asanalyzed first in the context of weak decays in [3965].
A pedagogical presentation of these issues can be foundin [3966].
13.1.1 Renormalization Group Improved Pertur-bation TheoryGenerally in weak decays several vastly different scalesare involved. These are the hadronic scales of a fewGeV, scales likeMW or mt and - in extensions of theSM - not only of a few TeV but even100 TeV. Alreadywithin the SM, but in particular in its NP extensions,the ordinary perturbation theory inαs is spoiled by theappearance of large logarithms of the ratios of two verydifferent scales that multiplyαs. Such logarithms havetobesummedtoallordersofperturbationtheorywhichcan be efficiently done by means of renormalization-13.1 Effective Hamiltonians in the Standard Model and Beyond 469group methods. Denoting the lower scale simply byµand the high scale byΛthe general expression forCi(µ)is given by:⃗C(µ) = ˆU(µ,Λ) ⃗C(Λ) , (13.1.6)where ⃗Cis a column vector built out ofCi. ⃗C(Λ) are theinitial conditions for the RG evolution down to low en-ergy scaleµ. They depend on the short distance physicsat high energy scales. In particular they depend onmtand the masses and couplings of new heavy particles.
The evolution matrixˆU(µ,Λ) sums large logarithmslog Λ/µ which appear forµ≪Λ. In the so-called lead-inglogarithmicapproximation(LO)terms (g2s log Λ/µ)nare summed. The next-to-leading logarithmic correc-tion (NLO) to this result involves summation of terms(g2s)n(log Λ/µ)n−1 and so on. This hierarchical struc-ture gives the RG-improved perturbation theory.
As an example let us consider only a single operatorso that Eqn. (13.1.6) reduces toC(µ) = U(µ,Λ)C(Λ) (13.1.7)with C(µ) denoting the coefficient of the operator inquestion.
Keeping the first two terms in the expansions ofthe anomalous dimension of this operatorγ(gs) and inβ(gs), that governs the evolution ofαs, in powers ofαsand gs,γ(gs) = γ(0) αs4π + γ(1)(αs4π)2, (13.1.8)β(gs) = −β0g3s16π2 −β1g5s(16π2)2 (13.1.9)gives:U(µ,Λ) =[1 + αs(µ)4π J1][αs(Λ)αs(µ)]P[1 −αs(Λ)4π J1](13.1.10)whereP = γ(0)2β0, J 1 = Pβ0β1 −γ(1)2β0. (13.1.11)General formulae for the evolution matrixˆU(µ,Λ)in the case of operator mixing and valid also for elec-troweak effects at the NLO level can be found in [3967].
The corresponding NNLO formulae are rather compli-cated and were given for the first time in [3968].
While by now NLO and NNLO QCD contributionsto almost all weak decays are known within the SM,the pioneering LO calculations for current-current op-erators [1211, 1212], penguin operators [3969, 3970],∆S = 2 operators [3971] and rare K decays [3972]should not be forgotten. The first review of NLO QCDcalculations can be found in [3967] and more recentlyincluding NNLO corrections in [3966, 3973].
It should be stressed that at the NLO level not onlytwo-loop anomalous dimensions of operators have to beknown but also QCD corrections to the WCs atµ= Λ.
Only then renormalization-scheme independent resultscan be obtained. They are known for most processes ofinterest and this technology is explained in details in[3964, 3966]On the whole, the status of present short distance(SD) contributions within the SM is satisfactory. Let usthen see what is the status of these calculations beyondthe SM.
13.1.2 QCD Effects Beyond the SMAs already stated at the beginning, NP contributionscan affect the WCs of the SM operators. This mod-ification takes place at the NP scale Λ so that afterthe RG evolution, theCi(µ) in Eqn. (13.1.5) are modi-fied. But in addition new operators with different Diracstructure, with examples given in Eqns. (13.1.2) and(13.1.3), can contribute if their coefficientsCNPj (Λ) arenon-vanishing or if they are generated by mixing of dif-ferent operators in the process of the RG evolution.
The inclusion of these contributions in the RG analysisrequires at the NLO level the calculations of their one-loop and two-loop anomalous dimensions. While theone-loop anomalous dimensions of such operators havebeen calculated in [680], the first two-loop calculationshave been presented in [3974, 3975]. Recently, theseNLO calculations have been generalized for both∆F =1 and ∆F = 2 transitions in the so-called Weak Effec-tive Theory (WET) [3976, 3977] and also for the Stan-dard Model Effective Field Theory (SMEFT) [3978]. Itturns out that the anomalous dimensions of operatorsinvolving both left-handed and right-handed currents,the so-called left-right operators, are much larger thanthose of most operators within the SM except for QCD-penguin operators. Thus even if their WCs could besmall at the scaleΛ they can be enhanced at scales ofthe order of a few GeV. The same applies also to scalaroperators.
13.1.3 Hadronic Matrix ElementsThe WCs, that include in the SM the CKM factors, arenot the whole story. To obtain the results for the de-cay amplitudes and the quark mixing observables, alsohadronic matrix elements of local operators, like theones in Eqns. (13.1.2) and (13.1.3), have to be calcu-lated. The present status can be sumarized as follows.470 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXING– For leptonic decays likeBs,d →µ+µ− and KL,S →µ+µ− only the weak decay constantsfBs, fBd andfK are required. They are defined e.g. by⟨0|(¯sγµ(1 −γ5)u)|K+⟩= ifKpµK, (13.1.12)wherepµK is the four-momentum of the decayingK+mesons. Similar forfBs and fBd.
They are known from LQCD calculations alreadywith an impressive precision [63, 685, 3979]fBs = 230.3(1.3)MeV,fBd = 190.0(1.3)MeV,fK = 155.7(3)MeV, (13.1.13)although in the case of KL,S → µ+µ− also gen-uine long distance QCD contributions enter. Theycannot be described by matrix elements of local op-erators and one has to develop some strategies toisolate the contribution described by the effectiveHamiltonian discussed by us. InBs,d and B± de-cays such effects are much smaller. However, theyare significant in charm meson decays.
– In semileptonic decays like K+ → π+ν¯ν, KL →π0ν¯ν,KL →π0ℓ+ℓ−,B →K(K∗)ℓ+ℓ−,B →D(D∗)ℓ+ℓ− and B →K(K∗)ν¯ν the formfactors for thetransitions K →π, B →K(K∗), B →D(D∗) en-ter. ForK decays these formfactors can even be ex-tracted from data on leading decays with the helpof ChPT and isospin symmetry [3980–3982]. Thosethat enterB decays they are usually calculated us-ing lightcone sum rules for low momentum trans-fer squaredq2 [3983] and LQCD for largeq2 [3984,3985]. Significant progress has been made here bynow with most recent analyses in [703, 3986–3988]where more information can be found.
– Moreover Heavy Quark Effective Theory (HQET)andHeavyQuarkExpansions(HQE)playanimpor-tant roles here. HQET represents a static approxi-mation for the heavy quark, covariantly formulatedin the language of an effective field theory. It allowsus to extract the dependence of hadronic matrix el-ements on the heavy quark mass and to exploit thesimplifications that arise in QCD in the static limit.
The most important application of HQET has beento the analysis of exclusive semileptonic transitionsinvolving heavy quarks, where this formalism allowsus to exploit the consequences of heavy quark sym-metry to relate formfactors and provides a basis forsystematic corrections to them →∞ limit. Thereare several excellent reviews on this subject [674,1390, 3989, 3990].
– For the calculation of the width differences inB0s,d−¯B0s,d mixing ∆Γs,d, lifetimes and totally inclusivedecay rates of heavy hadrons, the so-called heavyquark expansion (HQE) has been developed by sev-eral authors. It relies on the smallness of the pa-rameter ΛQCD/mb, whereΛQCD is a hadronic scale.
The coefficients in this expansion can be calculatedby LQCD. Nice reviews with some details are theones in [674, 1225, 1239, 3991] and a nice summaryof the present situation including historical develop-ment can be found in [3992].
– For ∆Ms,d significant progress has been made byLQCDintherecentyears.Heretherelevanthadronicmatrix elements are parametrized byfBs√ˆBs andfBd√ˆBd with ˆBs and ˆBd close to unity. Presentlythe most accurate results are those from HPQCDcollaboration [685]fBs√ˆBs = 256.1(5.7)MeV,fBd√ˆBd = 210.6(5.5)MeV (13.1.14)thatinadditiontolightquarksincludescharmquarks.
Also corresponding matrix elements for BSM oper-ators are already known but their precision shouldbe still improved. Similarly, the relevant hadronicmatrix elements for the parameter εK describingthe indirect CP-violation inKL →ππ decay are al-ready known with respectable precision from LQCDboth in the SM and beyond [684, 3993, 3994]. Somephysics insight into the numerical LQCD results hasalso been gained with the help of the DQCD ap-proach [3995].
– The calculations of hadronic matrix elements fornon-leptonic decays like K → ππ, B → πK etc.
are much more involved. For K → ππ the onlyapproaches providing matrix elements that can beconsistently combined (matched) with the WCs areLQCD, lead by the RBC-UKQCD collaboration andthe DQCD approach. But while from LQCD onlythe matrix elements of SM operators are known,all matrix elements of BSM operators have beencalculated using the DQCD approach [3996]. Yet,the accuracy of the latter calculations have to beimproved, and one should hope that also LQCDcollaborations will calculate these matrix elementsone day. However, based on the time required tocompute the matrix elements of SM operators us-ing LQCD, it could take even a decade to obtainsatisfactory results on these matrix elements fromLQCD. This is important in view of the present sta-tus of the direct CP violation inKL →ππ decayrepresented by the ratioε′/ε. We will return to thisissue in Section13.3.
– For non-leptonic exclusiveB decays LQCD cannotprovide the hadronic matrix elements directly butcan help in calculating non-perturbative parameters13.2 The quark mixing matrix 471in the context of the so-called QCD factorization(QCDF) [3997, 3998]. This approach can be appliedto B →ππ, but also to rare and radiative decays,such as B →K∗γ or B →K∗l+l−. In the heavy-quark limit, that is up to relative corrections of or-der ΛQCD/mb, the problem of computing exclusivehadronic decay amplitudes simplifies considerably.
A nice review by Buchalla can be found in Section7.4 of [3966], and also the one by Beneke [3999] canbe strongly recommended. There, also the so-calledsoft-collinear effective theory (SCET) [1762, 1764]is briefly discussed.
13.2 The quark mixing matrixPaolo GambinoThe rich flavor structure of the Standard Model (SM)and its CP violation both follow from the matricesof Yukawa couplings between the fermions (down andup quarks and charged leptons) and the Higgs boson.
The diagonalisation of these matrices determines thefermion masses and brings us to the flavor basis, wherethe charged weak current is no longer diagonal: as firstunderstood in the hadronic sector by Cabibbo [3957]and extended to three generations by Kobayashi andMaskawa [3958], charged currents mix the quarks ofdifferent generations in a way parameterized by theCabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa(CKM)quarkmixingma-trix. Interestingly, its elements display a remarkable hi-erarchy, possibly indicative of the unknown mechanismof flavor breaking [4000]:ˆVCKM =Vud Vus VubVcd Vcs VcbVtd Vts Vtb (13.2.1)=1 −λ2/2 λ Aλ 3(ρ−iη)−λ 1−λ2/2 Aλ2Aλ3(1−ρ−iη) −Aλ2 1+ O(λ4)where λ = sin θc ≃0.22 is a small expansion param-eter and A ≃0.8, ρ ≃0.16, η ≃0.36. As a unitarymatrix, ˆVCKM has in principle nine free parameters butsome of them can be absorbed by phase redefinitions. Inthe end, ˆVCKM has only four independent real param-eters: three Euler angles and a phase, or equivalentlyλ, A, ρ and η. The presence of a nonvanishing phase,i.e. of an imaginary part, implies CP violation. Sinceunitarity is specific to the three generations of the SMand to the absence of additional flavor violation, testingˆV†CKM ˆVCKM = 1 is an important step in the verificationof the SM and represents the modern equivalent of thetests of the universality of the charged currents. Any ofFig. 13.2.1Constraints on the apex of the Unitarity Triangleof (13.2.2) and their combination according to the UTFit col-laboration. Figure taken from Ref. [4001]. ¯ρ= ρ(1−λ2/2),¯η=η(1 − λ2/2)the off-diagonal relations can be represented by a tri-angle in the complex plane whose area is a measure ofCP violation. In particular, the triangle1 + VudV∗ubVcdV∗cb+ VtdV∗tbVcdV∗cb= 0 (13.2.2)is frequently considered because it has sides of compa-rable length, see Fig.13.2.1, and its parameters can allbe well determined inB decays. The anglesβ and γ atthe basis of this triangle correspond to the phases of theelements Vub and Vtd: Vub = |Vub|e−iγ, Vtd = |Vtd|e−iβ.
Various observables constrain the apex of this triangle.
TheresultsofaglobalfitareshowninFig. 13.2.1,whereone can see that different constraints agree well, verify-ing unitarity and determining the apex of the trianglewith high accuracy. As we will see below, there are testsof the unitarity ofˆVCKM that cannot be represented inthis plot.
The role of QCD in the determination of the CKMelements and in testing the CKM mechanism is cru-cial, with important perturbative and nonperturbativeaspects depending on the observable; some of the non-perturbative methods have already been discussed inSecs. 4.7 and 5.8.
The experimental and theoretical progress made inthe last 30 years is enormous and was mostly driven bylattice QCD; it allows for very precise tests of the CKMmechanism, as is apparent from Fig.13.2.1. Further im-provements will be possible with LCHb and Belle IIdata, but will generally require an effective synergy oftheory and experiment. In this section I will focus on472 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGmeasurements where QCD effects are most relevant andwhere tensions have appeared with the SM.
13.2.1 The Cabibbo angle and the first row uni-tarityThe parameterλin Eq. (13.2.1) corresponds to the sineof the Cabibbo angle and is determined, up to verysmall higher orders in λ, by |Vus|or |Vcd|. The highprecision with which |Vud|is known also allows for acompetitiveλdetermination.The unitarityof the CKMmatrix implies for the first row the relationΣ1 = |Vud|2 + |Vus|2 + |Vub|2 = 1, (13.2.3)but since|Vub|≈ 0.004 only the first two terms are rele-vant. Precise measurements of|Vus|and |Vud|thereforelead to a first important check of the CKM mechanism.
The most precise determination of|Vud|comes fromsuperallowed Fermi transitions (SFT), i.e.0+ →0+ nu-clear β decays. At the tree level, these decays are medi-ated by the vector current, whose conservation allowsfor a particularly clean theoretical description. Amongrecent refinements, hadronic effects in the radiative cor-rections, in particular in theγW box, have been studiedwith dispersive methods [4002, 4003], and the effect ofnuclear polarizability, which depends on nuclear struc-ture (NS), has been exposed [4004]. Considering 15 dif-ferent superallowed transitions gives a consistent resultand the error of the final value [4005],|Vud|= 0.97367(32) (0 + →0+) (13.2.4)is dominated by the NS effects. Neutronβ decay de-pends on the nucleon isovector axial chargegA/gV andhas recently become competitive,|Vud|= 0 .97413(43),if one includes only the current best experiments [4006].
Theoretically the cleanest channel isπ+ →π0eν, whichis however penalized by a10−8 BR. The present uncer-tainty based on PIBETA results [4007], δVud ∼0.003,is still far from being competitive, but there are plansto improve drastically on that [4008].
|Vus|can be directly accessed from kaon, hyperon,and tau semileptonic decays. The kaon decays,K →πℓν or Kℓ3 are measured in five channels (KL,S,K+with electron and muons) affected by different system-atics, with K →π form factors computed on the lat-tice, as discussed in Section4.7. Combining experimen-tal data and the average of severalNf = 2+1+1 latticeresults one obtains [476]|Vus|= 0.2231(4)exp(4)lat (Kℓ3), (13.2.5)see also [4006]. At this level of precision, however, aconsistent treatment of QED effects in the lattice calcu-lation becomes mandatory [63]. Hyperon decays give a0.960 0.965 0.970 0.9750.2200.2220.2240.2260.228VudVusFig. 13.2.21σconstraints in the(|Vud|,|Vus|) plane from su-perallowed Fermi transitions (red), from neutron decay (violet),Kℓ3 (green), Kµ2 (blue) and the 68% CL contour of the com-bined fit (yellow). The black line marks the unitarity relationbetween |Vud| and |Vus|. Figure taken from [4006].
consistent |Vus|but are presently not competitive withthe above result. The ratio of inclusive tau decays intostrange and non-strange hadrons can also be used toextract |Vus|/|Vud|, employing experimental data andFinite Energy Sum Rules, without lattice input. Recentresults tend to be over2σ lower than Eq. (13.2.5) andsubject to debate [4009, 4010], but a combination ofexperimental and lattice data on the hadronic vacuumpolarization functions gives|Vus|= 0.2245(11)exp(13)th[4011],inagreementwithEq.( 13.2.5).Exclusivetaude-cay channels or ratio such asB(τ →Kν)/B(τ →πν)can also be used together withfK,π computed on thelattice, see Section 4.7, to obtain |Vus| = 0 .2229(19)[4012], again consistent with Eq. (13.2.5).
A very precise determination of the ratio|Vus|/|Vud|can be obtained from the ratio ofK →µν(γ) to π →µν(γ) (decays [656]. Here nonperturbative QCD sits al-most completely in the ratio of fK and fπ, which isknown with a 0.2% uncertainty in 2+1+1 lattice QCD[63]. It then follows [4006]⏐⏐⏐VusVud⏐⏐⏐= 0.2311(5) ( Kµ2) (13.2.6)with the uncertainty dominated by lattice QCD. Usingunitarity this is equivalent to|Vus|= 0 .2245(5) and insome tension with Eq. (13.2.5).
The most precise constraints can be combined inthe (|Vud|,|Vus|) plane, see Fig. 13.2.2. We observe aclear tension between the best fit and unitarity, mostly13.2 The quark mixing matrix 473driven by the kaon determinations, which cross far fromthe unitarity line, and by the superallowed Fermi tran-sitions, which under unitarity imply a very high|Vus|.
On the other hand, |Vus|from Kℓ2 and the neutron|Vud|are compatible with unitarity. Taking the averageof the determinations from Fermi andn decay,|Vud|=0.97384(26), the actual deviation ofΣ1 from 1 variesbetween about 1.5σ using Eq. (13.2.6) and ∼3σ us-ing Eq. (13.2.5) and it is sometimes referred to as theCabibbo anomaly . It could be due to underestimateduncertainties in the NS correction, in the lattice cal-culations, in the experimental results, or due to NewPhysics [4013, 4014], and a renewed campaign ofKµ3and Kµ2 measurements will be crucial to clarify thesituation [4006].
As mentioned above,λcan also be determined fromD(s) →ℓν and D →π(K)ℓν. Concerning the former,as lattice calculations for fD have become very pre-cise, the uncertainties in|Vcs|= 0.982(10)exp(2)lat and|Vcd|= 0.2181(49)exp(7)lat [4012] are dominated by ex-periment.TheseresultsareconsistentwithEqs.( 13.2.4,13.2.5). FLAG has performed a combined fit to latticeand experimental data for the twoD semileptonic de-cays that yields|Vcs|= 0 .971(7) and |Vcd|= 0 .234(7)[63], but|Vcd|is about2σ above itsD→µν value. Av-eraging all these results, one can check the unitarity ofthe second row of the CKM matrix [63],Σ2 = |Vcd|2 + |Vcs|2 + |Vcb|2 = 1 + 0 .001(11), (13.2.7)where again the last term in the sum is negligible at thepresent accuracy. Neutrino Deep Inelastic Scattering isalso used to extract a consistent but less precise value of|Vcd|. The second row ofˆVCKM appears to be consistentwith unitarity, but the accuracy is much lower than forthe first row.
13.2.2 Determination of Vcb and VubThe magnitudes of two of the elements of the CKMmatrix, |Vub|and |Vcb|, can be directly extracted fromsemileptonic b-hadron (mostlyB meson) decays. In ex-clusive decays one looks at specific hadronic final states,while inclusive decays sum over all decays channels toa certain flavor (i.e. b → c). Inclusive and exclusivesemileptonic decays are subject to very different theo-retical and experimental systematics, see Refs. [4015,4016] for recent reviews.
The results of theB factories, analysed in the lightof the most recent theoretical calculations, are puzzling,because – especially for|Vcb|– the determinations fromexclusive and inclusive decays are in strong tension, anddespite recent new experimental and theoretical resultsthe situation remains unclear. While in principle NewPhysics may explain the tensions, it is significantly con-strained by the measured differential distributions inB →D(∗)ℓν [4017] and, in the context of the SM Ef-fective Theory or SMEFT, by LEP data [4018]. Thistension is all the more relevant as measurements in thesemitauonic channels at Belle, Babar, and LHCb showdiscrepancies with the SM predictions, pointing to apossible violation of lepton-flavor universality. ThisVcbpuzzle casts a shadow on our understanding of semi-tauonic decay as well. The inability to determine pre-cisely Vcb also hampers significantly NP searches in Fla-vor Changing Neutral Currents processes: the uncer-tainty on the value ofVcb dominates the theoretical un-certainty in the SM predictions for several observables,from εK to the branching fraction ofBs →µ+µ−.
Our understanding of inclusive semileptonicB de-cays, see also Section 5.8, is based on a simple idea:since inclusive decays sum over all possible hadronic fi-nal states, the quark in the final state hadronizes withunit probability and the transition amplitude is sen-sitive only to the long-distance dynamics of the ini-tial B meson. Thanks to the large hierarchy betweenthe typical energy release, ofO(mb), and the hadronicscale ΛQCD, and to asymptotic freedom, any residualsensitivity to non-perturbative effects is suppressed bypowers of ΛQCD/mb. From a phenomenological pointof view, it is remarkable that the linear preasymptoticcorrection is actually absent and that the leading non-perturbative corrections areO(Λ2QCD/m2b). This is dueto the Operator Product Expansion (OPE) that al-lows us to express the nonperturbative physics in termsof B meson matrix elements of local operators of di-mension d ≥ 5, while the Wilson coefficients can beexpressed as a perturbative series in αs [1255–1257,4019, 4020]. The OPE disentangles the physics asso-ciated with soft scales of order ΛQCD (parameterizedby the matrix elements of the local operators) fromthat associated with hard scales ∼ mb, which deter-mine the Wilson coefficients. Inclusive observables suchas the total semileptonic width and the moments ofthe kinematic distributions are therefore double expan-sions inαs and ΛQCD/mb, with a leading term that isgiven by the freeb quark decay. As already noted, thepower corrections start atO(Λ2QCD/m2b) and are com-paratively suppressed. At higher orders in the OPE,terms suppressed by powers ofmc also appear, startingwith O(Λ3QCD/m3b ×Λ2QCD/m2c) [4021]. The expansion474 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGfor the total semileptonic width isΓsl =Γ0[1 + a(1) αs(mb)π + a(2)(αsπ)2+ +a(3)(αsπ)3+(−12 + p(1) αsπ)µ2πm2b+(g(0) + g(1) αsπ)µ2G(mb)m2b+d(0) ρ3Dm3b−g(0) ρ3LSm3b+ higher orders],(13.2.8)where Γ0 is the tree-level free-quark decay width, andµ2π, µ2G, ρ3D and ρ3LS are hadronic parameters that haveto be determined from experimental data, i.e. from themoments of differential distributions, which can be ex-panded in the same way as the total width. The pertur-bativecorrectionsareknownupto O(α3s) andO(αs/m3b)for the total width [1241, 4022] and up toO(α2s) andO(αs/m2b) for the moments [4023–4026]. In line withthe discussion of Section5.8, it is important thatmband the other Heavy-Quark Expansion (HQE) param-eters are free from renormalon ambiguities. The kineticscheme [4027, 4028], for instance, employs a Wilsoniancutoff µ ∼1 GeV. Higher power corrections have beenconsidered in [4029–4031] and appear to have a negligi-ble impact on|Vcb|. Although the moments are rathersensitive to the differencemb −mc, a more precise de-termination of |Vcb|can be obtained taking advantageof the precise lattice determinations of the charm andbottom masses, see [476] for a review. The most recentglobal analysis in the kinetic scheme [4032] gives|Vcb|= 42.16(51) ×10−3, (B →Xcℓν) (13.2.9)where the uncertainty follows from the combination oftheoretical and experimental uncertainties. A consis-tent but less precise result has been recently obtainedfrom an analysis of the new Belle and Belle II measure-ments of theq2 moments [4033]. While the estimate inEq.(13.2.9) appears solid, new measurements at Belle IIwill provide welcome checks and may reduce the exper-imental uncertainty. There are also a few more higherorder effects worth computing, and QED effects shouldbe understood better. Most importantly, however, lat-tice calculations of inclusive quantities are now possi-ble and may soon complement the OPE approach [713,4034].
Theinclusivedeterminationof |Vub|fromB →Xuℓνdecays differs from that of|Vcb|mostly because of theexperimental cuts necessary to suppress the largeb →cℓν background: the local OPE does not converge wellintherestrictedphasespace.Themoderndescriptionofthese inclusive decays is therefore based on a non-localOPE [1259, 1260], where nonperturbative shape func-tions (SFs) play the role of parton distribution func-tions of the b quark inside theB meson. While the firstfew moments of the SFs are expressed in terms of thesame HQE parameters extracted inB →Xcℓν, directexperimental information on the SFs is limited to theB →Xsγ photon spectrum, to which they are only re-lated in themb →∞ limit. There are a few frameworksthat incorporate the above picture with a range of addi-tional assumptions: BLNP [4035] and GGOU [4036] usea large set of models for the SFs, while DGE [4037] com-putes the leading SF in resummed perturbative QCD.
Another potential source of theoretical uncertainty inall approaches is represented by the so called Weak An-nihilation contributions, namely nonperturbative con-tributions at highq2 arising fromb¯qweak annihilations(WA) in theB meson, where the ¯q is not necessarilythe light valence quark [4038]. Charm decays, and par-ticularly moments of the inclusive leptonic spectrum,constrain them effectively, and one can conclude thatthe WA correction to the total rate ofB →Xuℓν mustbe smaller than about 2% [4039, 4040]. Its localisationat high q2 and the sensitivity of theq2 tail to higherpowercorrectionssuggestthatanuppercuton q2 wouldbe useful in future analyses.
A few experimental analyses extend the measure-ment into the phase space region dominated byb →ctransitions, which are then modelled, trading part ofthe theory uncertainty for a larger systematic experi-mental uncertainty (in particular,D∗∗ and multihadronfinal states are not known very well): agreement amongthevariousanalysesshouldthenincreaseourconfidencein the result, but one should be aware that the recon-struction efficiencies depend on the modelling of thesignal, i.e. again on the SFs. The latest Heavy FlavourAveraging Group (HFLAV)|Vub|world averages in thethree above frameworks [4012] are based on a number ofdifferent experimental results with different kinematiccuts and read|Vub|BLNP= 4.28(13)+20−21 ×10−3,|Vub|GGOU= 4.19(12)+11−12 ×10−3, (13.2.10)|Vub|DGE = 3.93(10)+9−10 ×10−3,where the first uncertainty is experimental and the sec-ondcomesfromtheory.Unfortunately,theydonotagreewell with each other. Moreover, the values obtainedfromdifferentexperimentalanalysesarenotalwayscom-patible within their stated theoretical and experimentaluncertainties. The latest electron endpoint analysis byBaBar [4041], in particular, shows a dependence on themodel used to simulate the signal and leads to sharplydifferent results in BLNP and GGOU. This is the mostprecise analysis to date; in GGOU it favours a lower|Vub|= 3 .96(10)(17) ×10−3 while in BLNP the resultis |Vub|= 4.41(12)(27) ×10−3. While it is possible thatmodelling the signal has biased previous endpoint re-sults, we stress that analyses involving a larger fraction13.2 The quark mixing matrix 475of the phase space are generally less sensitive to SFs andother theoretical systematics, which are inherently dif-ficult to estimate. In this respect, applying a cut on thehadronic invariant massMX <1.7 GeV seems to be thesafest approach, as it depends little on the reconstruc-tion of theb →c background, captures almost 60% ofthe phase space, and strikes a balance between experi-mental and theoretical uncertainties. In the recent Belleanalysis [4042], where machine learning techniques andhadronic tagging were used to reduce backgrounds, theresult in GGOU (very much consistent with BLNP andDGE) is|Vub|= 3.97(18)(17)×10−3, (B →Xuℓν) (13.2.11)which in my opinion represents the current state of theart. Improvements will certainly come from the higherstatistics available at Belle II and from the implementa-tion of higher order calculations such as [4043]. For in-stance, the completeO(α2s) perturbative contributionsto the triple differential rate is still missing, despite nu-merical results for the moments [4044]. A precise studyof the differential spectra, recently measured at Bellefor the first time [4045], will validate the theoreticalframeworks and help constrain the SFs. The SIMBA[1800] and NNVub [4046] methods are well posed toanalyse the Belle II data in a model independent andefficient way. In the longer run, lattice studies like thosementioned for inclusiveb →c transitions should alsobecome possible.
The exclusive B → Dℓν and B → D∗ℓν chan-nels are also used to extract |Vcb|. These decays aredescribed by nonperturbative form factors which arecomputed in lattice QCD (as discussed in Section4.7)as well as with approximate methods like Light ConeSum Rules (LCSR), see Section5.8. Typically, the lat-tice calculations are better under control at large ormaximal q2, corresponding to small or vanishing recoil,while LCSR prefer the smallq2 range and are less pre-cise. Moreover, heavy quark symmetry guarantees thatthe form factors at zero recoil are absolutely normalisedin the heavy quark limit. As the rates vanish at zerorecoil in both cases, see Eq. (4.7.13), the experimen-tal data are much less precise at low recoil and oneneeds to parameterize the form factors in a model in-dependent way in order to describe the form factors inthe whole kinematic range and to interpolate betweenthe small and large recoil regions. Model independentparametrizations based on a dispersive approach havebeen developed in the 1990s and the two most relevantones are known as BGL and BCL [4047, 4048]; the formfactors are expressed, up to known prefactors, as series0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.060.60.70.80.91.01.11.21.3form factors f+HzL Hupper plotL and f0HzL Hlower plotLFig. 13.2.3 Form factorsf+,0(z) for the B → D transitionscomputed by FNAL/MILC [4057] (red) and HPQCD [4058](blue) and experimental data from Belle (brown) and BaBar(green) normalised by the fitted value of|Vcb|. The bands showthe results of the global fit. Figure from Ref. [4059].
in the variablez=√w+ 1 −√2√w+ 1 +√2, (13.2.12)where w = ( m2B + MD(∗) −q2)/(2mBmD(∗) ). In thephysical range z is small, < 0.07, and unitarity putsconstraints on the size of the series coefficients. A vari-ant, proposed in [4049] and known as CLN, additionallyemploys Next to Leading Order Heavy Quark Effec-tive Theory relations and QCD sum rules to reduce thenumber of relevant parameters to two. These additionalinputs imply an uncertainty that can no longer be ne-glected, see [4050–4053] for updates and improvementson the CLN approach. It is then unfortunate that priorto 2016 the experimental results were generally givenin terms of fits to the CLN parametrization, withoutaccounting for this uncertainty. More recent measure-ments [4054–4056] provide the differentialq2 and angu-lar (for B →D∗ℓν) unfolded distributions or the nec-essary ingredients (efficiencies and response functions)to fold theoretical predictions and get the yields in eachbin.
In the B → Dℓν case precise lattice calculationsat small but non-zero recoil are available since severalyears [4058, 4060] and have been combined with theexperimental results of Refs. [4054, 4061] to get [4059]|Vcb|= 40.5(1.0)10−3 (B →Dℓν). (13.2.13)A similar value is found in [63]. Indeed, the lattice andexperimental form factor shapes are in good agreement,satisfy the unitarity constraints, and the overall fit isgood and stable, see Fig. 13.2.3. The BGL and BCLparametrizations give identical results and the fit also476 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGprovides a SM prediction for the Lepton Flavor Uni-versality ratioR(D) = Γ(B →Dτν)/Γ(B →Dµν) =0.299(3) [4059], in reasonable agreement with the ex-perimental world averageR(D)exp = 0.339(30) [4012].
In theB →D∗ℓνchannel the situation is more com-plicated.Fromtheexperimentalpointofviewthischan-nel allows for a more precise determination of|Vcb|thanthe B →D channel and angular distributions can bestudied in addition to theq2 distribution. On the otherhand, theD∗ meson decays strongly toDπ (it cannotbe considered stable) and three (four) different formfactors contribute for a massless (massive) lepton. Theonly lattice calculation of these form factors away fromthe zero-recoil point has been published so far by theFermilab-MILC Collaboration [708], although JLQCDand HPQCD calculation are in their final stage [710,4062]. Restricting to experimental analyses that pro-vide data in a model independent way, Belle has pre-sented a tagged [4055] and an untagged analysis [4056].
The dataset of [4055] showed for the first time thatthe extraction of |Vcb|could strongly depend on theparametrization employed: BGL and CLN both gavereasonable fits with|Vcb|values differing by about 6%[4063, 4064]. It has subsequently been disowned by thecollaboration, but the pointremains valid: parametriza-tions matter and the related uncertainties have to becarefully considered. The more precise dataset of theuntagged analysis [4056], despite a few problems [4065],did not show any parametrization dependence. A globalfit based on [4066] that includes the Fermilab calcu-lation [708], unitarity constraints, and the Belle un-tagged data only, while adjusting for the D’Agostinibias [4067], leads to|Vcb|= 39.3(9)10−3 (B →D∗ℓν), (13.2.14)but the agreement between the Fermilab form factorshape and the experimental distributions is not goodand the totalχ2 is large.116 An additional uncertaintyof ∼0.5% for missing QED corrections should be addedtoEq.( 13.2.14),aswellastoEqs.( 13.2.9)and( 13.2.13).
There is also a troubling tension between the Fermilabresults and the ratio of form factors computed in NLOHQET. Preliminary results for theB →D∗ form fac-tors have also been disclosed by the JLQCD collabo-ration [4068] and in this case the agreement with Belledata is much better, with a final|Vcb|= 40.7(+1.0−0.9)10−3.
One can also add LCSR constraints on the form factors116 The result in (13.2.14) differs from that reported in [708]and adopted in [476], |Vcb| = 38 .4(7)10−3, mostly because ofthe D’Agostini bias (not considered in [708]), of the way uni-tarity constraints are implemented, and of the QED Coulombfactor that is included in [708], neglecting however other QEDcorrections.
[3987], with minimal change in|Vcb|. Despite these lat-est developments, HFLAV also quotes an average of ex-perimentalresultsintheCLNparametrizationbasedontheformfactoratzerorecoilonly, |Vcb|= 38.46(68) 10−3,but this result is subject to uncontrolled uncertain-ties related to the way the CLN parametrization hasbeen used. The two Belle datasets have also been anal-ysed in the Dispersive Matrix approach [4069], wherethe form factors are constrained by the Fermilab lat-tice data and unitarity only; tensions with the exper-imental data are observed here as well. The fit thatoriginates Eq. (13.2.14) gives also R(D∗) = Γ(B →D∗τν)/Γ(B →D∗µν) = 0 .249(1), confirming the ten-sion with the experimental world averageR(D∗)exp =0.295(14) [4012].
LHCb has recently performed the first determina-tion of|Vcb|using B0s decays [4070]. Using bothB0s →D(∗)−s µ+ν and the lattice results from Refs. [709, 4071],theyobtain |Vcb|= 41.7(0.8)(0.9)(1.1)10−3.Ontheotherhand, Babar using a simplified BGL parametrizationfinds |Vcb|= 38 .4(9)10−3 [4072]. In summary, the situ-ation for the exclusive determination of|Vcb|is still un-settled, but a tension with the inclusive determinationof Eq. (13.2.9) is undisputable. New lattice calculationsperformed with relativistic heavy quarks such as [710]will extend theirq2 range, making it possible to extract|Vcb|at large recoil, where experimental data are moreaccurate. New experimental analyses of Belle and BelleII data are also expected soon. As this is paralleled bya renewed experimental and theoretical activity on theinclusive front, we can hope that theVcb puzzle will findits resolution.
Moving to the exclusive determination of|Vub|, itproceeds through the B →π channel. In analogy tothe B →D case, only one form factor is relevant formassless leptons and it is standard practice to performa BCL fit to lattice [704, 711, 4073] and LCSR calcu-lations and to experimental data from several experi-ments, see [4012]. HFLAV employs the Fermilab andRBC/UKQCD form factors and the LCSR calculationof [4074] to find |Vub| = 3 .67(15)10−3. An updatedLCSR result is presented in [4075] and leads to|Vub|= 3.77(15)10−3 (B →πℓν). (13.2.15)The recent JLQCD form factorf+(q2) [711] is slightlylower than the Fermilab and RBC/UKQCD and alsoimplies a higher|Vub|. The fits in [4012, 4075] are bothconsistent, but there are two outliers which drive thevalue of |Vub|down. Removing the outliers the resultincreases |Vub|by about one sigma [4076]. We can con-clude that the agreement between inclusive and exclu-sive determinations of|Vub|has become acceptable, butmore stringent tests will be possible in the next few13.2 The quark mixing matrix 477years. With the large statistics that will be available atBelle II the channelB →τν will become competitivewith B →πℓν for the extraction of|Vub|. To this end,neglecting QED effects, the only QCD input is the de-cay constantfB, which is already known to better than1%, see Section4.7.
Finally, two recent semileptonic measurements atLHCb place constraints on|Vub/Vcb|. The first concernsthe ratio ofΛb →pµν to Λb →Λcµν decays [715] andmakes use of a pioneering lattice calculation of baryonicform factors [714]; the result is [4012]|Vub||Vcb|= 0.079(4)(4) ( Λb →pµν) (13.2.16)where the uncertainties are experimental and from theform factors. The second is the first measurement ofBs →Kµν; the decay is normalised toBs →Dsµνin two bins ofq2 [4077]. Using lattice results from theFNAL/MILC Collaboration [4078] for the highq2 binand LCSR [4079] for the lowq2 bin, one obtains val-ues of|Vub/Vcb|in sharp disagreement with each other,which requires further scrutiny. Averaging Ref. [4078]with older results in the high q2 bin of Ref. [4077],FLAG finds |Vub/Vcb| = 0 .086(5) [63]. We can com-pare this and Eq. (13.2.16) with Eqs. (13.2.9,): frominclusive decays we get|Vub/Vcb|= 0 .094(6), from ex-clusive decays|Vub/Vcb|= 0 .094(4), and in both casesthe tension with Eq. (13.2.16) is over 2σ. The agree-ment improves for lower|Vub|or higher |Vcb|. This isanother puzzling issue: hopefully, future measurementsand lattice calculations of baryonic and mesonic formfactor will clarify the situation.
As mentioned above, semileptonicb decays are notthe only observables sensitive to |Vcb|and |Vub|. As-suming the validity of the SM and therefore the uni-tarity of the CKM matrix, one can also extract Vcbfrom loop induced observables likeεK and B(s) −¯B(s)mixing, as well as from rare kaon and B decays [4001,4080–4084], and the precision starts to be competitive.
For instance, theB(s) meson mass differences are pro-portional to |Vcb|2: ∆M(d,s) ∝ |Vtd,ts|2 and |Vts|2 ≈|Vcb|2, |Vtd|2 = λ2 sin2 γ|Vcb|2. εK is even more sen-sitive, εK ∝ |Vcb|3.4, and the branching fraction forKL →π0ν¯ν is proportional to|Vcb|4. Deviations fromthe direct (semileptonic) determinations would signalNew Physics. The present situation is illustrated inFig.13.2.4,wheretheconstraintsfromsomeoftheseob-servables in the(γ,|Vcb|) plane are shown, with a clearpreference for a high|Vcb|. As far as|Vub|is concerned,global fits performed without its direct determinationtend to return values close to Eq. (13.2.15).
Fig. 13.2.4 Present constraints fromεK, ∆Md, and∆Ms inthe (γ,|Vcb|) plane, see Ref. [4082] for details.
13.2.3 Meson mixing and CP asymmetriesSo far we have discussed the elements of the first tworows of ˆVCKM: their magnitudes determine preciselyλ and A in Eq. (13.2.1), and the ratio|Vub/Vcb|con-strains the apex of the unitarity triangle, as shown inFig. 13.2.1. In order to determine completely the re-maining parameters ρ and η, however, one needs ad-ditional information. As the elements of the third rowcannot be precisely measured yet, we now turn to loopmediated B(s) mixing and rare decays, and CP asym-metries, focussing only on the most constraining ob-servables.
In the SM the mass difference∆Md,s between thetwo mass eigenstates of theB0 and B0s systems is pro-portional to|Vtd|2 and |Vts|2, respectively, and the rel-evant nonperturbative QCD physics is all contained inthe product f2BqˆBBq of decay constants and bag pa-rameters, see Eq. (4.7.11). The ratio∆Ms/∆Md is par-ticularly interesting because some uncertainty cancelsout: the latest Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 value [685] for ξ =fBs/fBd√BBs/BBd is ξ = 1 .216(16), which togetherwith accurate measurements [4012] allows for the verystrong constraint shown in red in Fig.13.2.1. Individ-ually, ∆Md,s are slightly less precise but have a verydifferent sensitivity to|Vcb|, see Fig.13.2.4. In the kaonsector one looks at CP-violation in mixing, quantifiedby εK, see Subsec.13.3.3, which is sensitive to a com-bination of CKM elements. The bulk ofεK is due to itsshort-distance component, whose uncertainty is domi-nated by the bag parameter ˆBK, see e.g. [3966]. Therecent average of lattice calculations reported in Sec-tion 4.7, ˆBK = 0 .7625(97), leads to the constraintsshown in Fig.13.2.1 and 13.2.4. Finally, different CPasymmetries allow for a direct extraction of the phase478 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGof some CKM element, with minimal or no QCD input.
In particular, the measurement of the time-dependentCP asymmetry inB →J/ψKS givessin 2β = 0.699(17)(green band in Fig. 13.2.1); the study of the inter-ference between the tree-level decays B− → D0K−and B− → ¯D0K−gives γ = 66 .1(3.5)◦ [4012] (blueband in Fig.13.2.1); the time-dependent asymmetriesin B →ππ,ρρ have been used to extractα= 85.4(4.6)◦(gray bands in Fig.13.2.1).
The global picture that emerges from all these andadditional less important inputs is summarised by theglobal fit that gives the apex of the unitarity trian-gle in Fig. 13.2.1: ¯ρ = 0 .156(12) and ¯η = 0 .350(10)[4001]. The consistency between the various constraintsis impressive and in the last 18 years the overall pre-cision has improved by a factor 4(3) for¯ρ(¯η). One cancompare some of the above inputs with the values ob-tained from a global fit performed without them: theresults are sin 2β = 0 .750(27), γ = 66 .1(2.1)◦, α =90.5(2.1)◦ [4001]. Very similar results are also obtainedby the CKMFitter Collaboration [4084], which reports¯ρ= 0.157(+8−5) and ¯η= 0.348(+12−5 ).
In summary, the CKM mechanism describes suc-cessfully a host of data, in many cases with crucialQCD input. As discussed in Subsections 13.2.1 and13.2.2, there are potential problems that require furtherscrutiny, and more serious anomalies will be discussedin Section13.4, but it is premature to attribute them toNew Physics. On the contrary, present data place verystrong constraints on a variety of New Physics scenar-ios, in particular on those that modify the CKM mech-anism more radically, see e.g. [3966, 4085]. From aneffective field theory point of view, the measurementswe have considered in this Section imply that the scaleΛ of New Physics with a generic flavor structure mustbe well beyond the TeV range.
13.3 The Important Role of QCD in fla-vor PhysicsAndrzej J. BurasThe importance of QCD effects depends on processesconsidered.Whiletheirinclusioninprocesseslike K+ →π+ν¯ν, KL →π0ν¯ν, B0s,d →µ+µ− is important in orderto increase the precision of SM predictions, neglectingthem would result in uncertainties in the ballpark of atmost 30%, significant but not crucial if one wants toget a rough idea what are the SM predictions for suchdecays. There are extensive reviews on them and mostof these decays are discussed in [3966]. Here we want toconfine our presentation to cases in which QCD playsan essential role and neglecting QCD effects one wouldfail the description of the data not by30%, but by fac-tors of at least two and sometimes even by an order ofmagnitude.
13.3.1 B →Xsγ DecayThe calculations of NLO and NNLO QCD correctionsto B →Xsγ decay are probably the best known to thephysics community among all QCD calculations in thefield of weak decays. One of the reasons is the fact thatthe b →sγ transition was the first penguin-mediatedtransition inB physics to be discovered in 1993 in theexclusive decay channel B → K∗γ measured in theCLEO experiment [4086]. The inclusive branching ra-tio B →Xsγ has been measured in 1994 by the samegroup [4087]. The other reason is the particular struc-ture of the QCD corrections to this decay that requiresa two-loop calculation in order to obtain the anomalousdimension matrix in the LO approximation. Because ofthis it took six years after the first QCD calculationsin ordinary perturbation theory to obtain the correctresult for the QCD corrections to B → Xsγ in theRG-improved perturbation theory at LO. It involved 5groups and 16 physicists. It is not then surprising thatthe corresponding NLO calculations took nine years. In2022 this decay is known including NNLO corrections.
A detailed historical account of NLO calculations canbe found in [3973] and an introduction to technical de-tails in [3966]. Most extensive NNLO calculations havebeen reported first in [4088], and after a number of up-dates the last one has been presented in [4089]B(B →Xsγ)SM = (3.36 ±0.23) ×10−4 , (13.3.1)for Eγ ≥1.6 GeV. It agrees very well with experimentwhich reached the accuracy of4.5% [4090]B(B →Xsγ)exp = (3.32 ±0.15) ×10−4 , (13.3.2)where againEγ ≥1.6 GeV has been imposed. One ex-pects that in this decade the Belle II experiment willreach the accuracy of3% so that very precise tests ofthe SM will be possible. Already now this decay pro-vides an important constraint on new physics.
In order to appreciate these results let us briefly de-scribe why these very difficult calculations were crucial.
Indeedin1987twogroups[ 4091,4092]calculated O(αs)QCD corrections to theB →Xsγ rate finding a hugeenhancement of this rate relative to the partonic resultwithout QCD corrections. In 1987, when mt ≤ MWwas still considered, this enhancement was almost byan order of magnitude. With the increased value ofmtin the 1990’s also the partonic rate increased, and in13.3 The Important Role of QCD in flavor Physics 4792022 the dominant additive QCD corrections, althoughstill very important, amount roughly to a factor of 2.5.
The additive QCD corrections in question originateinthemixingoftheleadingcurrent-currentoperator Q2like the one in Eqn. (13.3.5) with the magnetic-photonpenguinoperator Q7γ thatisdirectlyresponsibleforthedecay b →sγ. The calculation of the relevant anoma-lous dimensions at LO is a two-loop affair and conse-quently it took some time before the correct result hadbeen obtained. An important role in resolving these in-consistencies present in the literature played MikolajMisiak [4093, 4094]. But the final LO result has beenprovided by the Rome group [4095, 4096].
Once this issue had been solved it was possible tooutline an NLO calculation in [4097]. Such a calculationwas motivated by the finding in [4098] that the LO ratefor B →Xsγ exhibited a very large renormalization-scale dependence. Changing the scaleµb in the Wilsoncoefficient frommb/2 to 2mb changed the rate ofB →Xsγ by roughly60% making a detailed comparison oftheory with experiment impossible.
A large number of authors contributed to the calcu-lation of NLO corrections, with their names and refer-ences listed in Table 5 of the review in [3973]. See alsothe 2002 summary of NLO calculation in [4099].
YetalreadyoneyearbeforeamotivationforaNNLOcalculation was born. While the NLO calculations de-creased the µb-dependence present in the LO expres-sions significantly, a new uncertainty had been pointedout by Paolo Gambino and Mikolaj Misiak in 2001[4100]. It turns out that theB →Xsγrate suffers at theNLO from a significant,±6%, uncertainty due to thechoice of the charm quark mass in the two-loop matrixelements of the four quark operators, in particular in⟨sγ|Q2|B⟩. In the following years, considerable progressin the NNLO program ofB →Xsγ was made. It wasan effort of 17 theorists [4088] and lead eventually tothe result in Eqn. (13.3.1) summarized in [4089].
13.3.2 QCD dynamics and the ∆I = 1/2 ruleOne of the puzzles of the 1950s was a large dispar-ity between the measured values of the real parts ofthe isospin amplitudesA0 and A2 in K →ππ decays,which on the basis of usual isospin considerations wereexpected to be of the same order. In 2022 we know theexperimental values of the real parts of these ampli-tudes very precisely [4101]ReA0 = 27.04(1) ×10−8 GeV,ReA2 = 1.210(2) ×10−8 GeV. (13.3.3)As ReA2 is dominated by ∆I = 3 /2 transitions butReA0 receives contributions also from∆I = 1 /2 tran-sitions, the latter transitions dominateReA0 which ex-presses the so-called∆I = 1/2 rule [4102, 4103]R= ReA0ReA2= 22.35. (13.3.4)In the 1950s QCD and the Operator Product Expan-sion did not exist and clearly one did not know thatW±bosons exist in nature, but using the ideas of Fermi[4104], Feynman and Gell-Mann [4105] and Marshakand Sudarshan [4106] one could still evaluate the am-plitudes ReA0 and ReA2 to find out that such a highvalue ofR is a real puzzle.
In modern times we can reconstruct this puzzle byevaluating the simpleW± boson exchange between therelevant quarks which after integrating outW± gener-ates the current-current operatorQ2:Q2 = (¯sγµ(1 −γ5)u) (¯uγµ(1 −γ5)d) . (13.3.5)With onlyQ2 contributing we haveReA0,2 = GF√2 VudV∗us⟨Q2⟩0,2 . (13.3.6)Calculating the matrix elements ⟨Q2⟩0,2 in the strictlarge N limit, which corresponds to factorization of ma-trix elements ofQ2 into the product of matrix elementsof currents, we find⟨Q2⟩0 =√2⟨Q2⟩2 = 23 fπ(m2K −m2π), (13.3.7)and consequentlyReA0 = 3.59 ×10−8 GeV,ReA2 = 2.54 ×10−8 GeV,R =√2, (13.3.8)in plain disagreement with the data in Eqns. (13.3.3)and (13.3.4). It should be emphasized that the expla-nation of the missing enhancement factor of15.8 in Rthrough some dynamics must simultaneously give thecorrect values forReA0 and ReA2. This means that thisdynamics should suppressReA2 by a factor of2.1, notmore, and enhanceReA0 by a factor of7.5. This tells usthat while the suppression ofReA2 is an important in-gredient in the∆I = 1/2 rule, it is not the main originof this rule. It is the enhancement ofReA0 as alreadyemphasized in [1209] even if, in contrast to this paper,as pointed out first in 1986 [3960] and demonstratedin the context of the Dual QCD approach, the current-current operators, likeQ2, are responsible dominantlyfor this rule and not QCD penguins. An update andimprovements over the 1986 analysis appeared in 2014[3961] with the resultR≈16.0 ±1.5 , DQCD (1986 ,2014), (13.3.9)480 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGthat is one order of magnitude enhancement over theresult in Eqn. (13.3.8) without QCD up to confinementof quarks in mesons. The missing piece could come fromfinal state interactions as pointed out first by nuclearphysicists [4107] and stressed much later by ChPT ex-perts [4108]. Also 1/N2 corrections could also changethis result but are unknown.
Meanwhile the RBC-UKQCD LQCD collaborationconfirmed in 2012 the 1986 DQCD finding that current-current operators dominate the ∆I = 1 /2 rule. Butthe results from the series of their three papers showhow difficult these calculations on the lattice are:R=12 ±1.7 [4109], R= 31.0 ±11.1 [691] and finally [3962]ReA0ReA2= 19.9(2.3)(4.4), RBC −UKQCD (2020)(13.3.10)that is consistent with the DQCD value and in agree-ment with the experimental value22.4.
While the RBC-UKQCD result is closer to the datathan the DQCD one, the dynamics behind this rule,except for the statement that it is QCD, has not beenprovided by these authors. To this end it is necessary toswitch off QCD interactions which can be done in thelarge N limit in DQCD but it seems to be impossibleor very difficult on the lattice.
The anatomy of QCD dynamics as seen within theDQCD approach has been presented in [3960,3961] andin particular in Section 7.2.3 of [3966]. Here we justpresent an express view of this dynamics.
Starting with the values in Eqn. (13.3.8), the firststep is to include the short-distance RG-evolution ofWCs from scales O(MW) down to scales in the ball-park of 1 GeV. This is the step made already in thepioneering 1974 calculations in [1211, 1212] except thatthey were done at LO in the RG-improved perturbationtheory and now can be done at the NLO level. These1974 papers have shown that the short distance QCDeffects enhanceReA0 and suppressReA2. However, theinclusion of NLO QCD corrections to WCs ofQ2 andQ1 operators [3965, 4110] made it clear, as stressed inparticular in [3965], that theK →ππ amplitudes with-out the proper calculation of hadronic matrix elementsof Qi are both scale and renormalization-scheme de-pendent. Moreover, further enhancement ofReA0 andfurther suppression ofReA2 are needed in order to beable to understand the∆I = 1/2 rule.
This brings us to the second step first performed in1986 in [3960] within the DQCD approach. Namely, theRG-evolution down to the scalesO(1 GeV) is continuedas a short but fastmeson evolution down to zero mo-mentum scales at which the factorization of hadronicmatrix elements is at work and one can in no time cal-culate the hadronic matrix elements in terms of mesonmases and weak decay constants as seen in (13.3.7).
Equivalently, starting with factorizable hadronic ma-trix elements of current-current operators atµ≈0 andevolving them toµ= O(1 GeV) at which the WCs areevaluated one is able to calculate the matrix elements ofthese operators atµ= O(1 GeV) and properly combinethem with their WCs evaluated at this scale. The finalstep is the inclusion of QCD penguin operators thatprovide an additional enhancement ofA0 by roughly10% without changingA2.
In [3960] only the pseudoscalar meson contributionsto meson evolution have been included and thequarkevolution, RG evolution aboveµ= O(1 GeV), has beenperformed at LO. The improvements in 2014 [3961]were the inclusion of vector meson contributions to themeson evolution and the NLO corrections to quark evo-lution. These improvements practically removed scaleand renormalization-scheme dependences and broughtthe theory closer to data.
Based on DQCD and RBC-UKQCD results we con-cludethattheQCDdynamicsisdominantlyresponsiblefor the∆I = 1/2 rule. However, in view of large uncer-tainties in both DQCD and RBC-UKQCD results, NPcontributions at the level of15% could still be present.
See [4111] to find out what this NP could be.
Finally other authors suggested different explana-tions of the∆I = 1/2 rule within QCD that were pub-lished dominantly in the 1990s and their list can befound in [3966]. But in my view the DQCD pictureof what is going on is more beautiful and transpar-ent as asymptotic freedom and related non-factorizableQCD interactions are primarly responsible for this rule.
It is simply the quark evolution from MW down toscale O(1 GeV) as analysed first by Altarelli and Ma-iani [1212] and Gaillard and Lee [1211], followed by themeson evolution [3960, 3961] down to very low scalesat which QCD becomes a theory of weakly interactingmesons and a free theory of mesons in the strict largeN limit, a point made by ’tHooft and Witten in 1970s.
13.3.3 QCD Dynamics and the Ratio ε′/εWhile, the parameter ε ≡ εK measures the indirectCP-violation inKL →ππ decays, that is originating inK0 −¯K0 mixing, the parameterε′ describes the directCP violation, that is in the decay itself.
Experimentally εand ε′ can be found by measuringthe ratiosη00 = A(KL →π0π0)A(KS →π0π0) , η +− = A(KL →π+π−)A(KS →π+π−) .13.3 The Important Role of QCD in flavor Physics 481(13.3.11)Indeed, assumingε and ε′ to be small numbers onefindsη00 = ε− 2ε′1 −√2ω, η +− = ε+ ε′1 + ω/√2, (13.3.12)where ω = ReA 2/ReA0 = 0 .045. In the absence of di-rect CP violationη00 = η+−. The ratioε′/ε can thenbe measured throughRe(ε′/ε) = 16(1 + ω/√2)(1 −⏐⏐⏐⏐η00η+−⏐⏐⏐⏐2). (13.3.13)The story ofε′/εboth in the theory and experimenthas been described in detail in [4112]. On the experi-mental side the chapter onε′/ε seems to be closed forthenearfuture.Afterheroicefforts,lasting15years,theexperimental world average ofε′/ε from NA48 [4113]and KTeV [4114, 4115] collaborations reads(ε′/ε)exp = (16.6 ±2.3) ×10−4 . (13.3.14)On the theoretical side the first calculation ofε′/εthatincludedRGQCDeffectstoQCDpenguin(QCDP)contributions is due to Gilman and Wise [4116] who -following Shifman, Vainshtein and Zakharov [1209] - as-sumed that the∆I = 1 /2 rule is explained by QCDP.
Using the required values of the QCDP matrix elementsfor the explanation of this rule, they predictedε′/ε tobe in the ballpark of5 ×10−2. During the 1980s thisvalue decreased by roughly a factor of 50 dominantlydue to three effects:– The first calculation of hadronic matrix elementsof QCDP operators in QCD - carried out in theframework of the DQCD [3960, 4117, 4118] in thestrict largeN limit of colors - proved that QCDPsare not responsible for the∆I = 1/2 rule and theirhadronic matrix elements are much smaller.
– TheQCDPcontributionto ε′/εthroughisospinbreak-ing in the quark masses [4119, 4120] is suppressed.
– Enhancement of the suppression of ε′/ε by elec-troweak penguin (EWP) contributions by the largetop quark mass [4121, 4122].
In the 1990s these calculations have been refinedthrough NLO QCD calculations to both QCDP andEWP contributions by the Munich and Rome teams[4123–4126] and [4127, 4128], respectively. In [4129] theNNLO QCD effects on EWP contributions have beencalculated. The NNLO QCD effects on QCDP contri-butions are expected to be known in 2022.
TheseNLOandNNLOQCDcontributionsdecreasedvarious scale and renormalization-scheme uncertaintiesand suppressedε′/ε within the SM further so that al-ready in 2000 we knew that this ratio should be of theorder of1.0 ×10−3. Unfortunately even today the the-orists do not agree on whether the SM agrees with theexperimental value in (13.3.14) or not. The reason aredifferent estimates of non-perturbative hadronic QCDeffects. This has been summarized recently in [3963].
We recall only the main points below.
ε′ is governed by the real and imaginary parts of theisospin amplitudesA0 and A2 so thatε′/ε is given by[4130]ε′ε = − ω+√2 |ε|[ImA0ReA0(1 −ˆΩeﬀ) −1aImA2ReA2],(13.3.15)with (ω+,a) and ˆΩeﬀ given in 2022 as followsω+ = aReA2ReA0= (4.53 ±0.02) ×10−2 (13.3.16)with a= 1.017 andˆΩeﬀ = (29 ±7) ×10−2 . (13.3.17)Here a and ˆΩeﬀ summarize isospin breaking correc-tions and include strong isospin violation(mu ̸= md),the correction to the isospin limit coming from∆I =5/2 transitions and electromagnetic corrections [4131–4133]. The most recent value forˆΩeﬀ given above in-cludes the nonet of pseudoscalar mesons and η −η′mixing [4134]. If only the octet of pseudoscalar mesonsis included so that η −η′ mixing does not enter, aspresently done in ChPT, one findsˆΩeﬀ = (17 ±9) 10−2[4135], a value calledˆΩ(8)eﬀ here. The inclusion ofη−η′mixing yields ˆΩ(9)eﬀ in (13.3.17). This contribution is im-portant, a fact known already for 35 years [4119, 4120].
ImA0 receivesdominantlycontributionsfromQCDPbut also from EWP.ImA2 receives contributions exclu-sively from EWP. Keeping this in mind it is useful towrite [4136](ε′ε)SM=(ε′ε)QCDP−(ε′ε)EWP(13.3.18)with(ε′ε)QCDP= Imλt ·(1 −ˆΩeﬀ)[15.4 B(1/2)6 (µ∗) −2.9],(13.3.19)(ε′ε)EWP= Imλt ·[8.0 B(3/2)8 (µ∗) −2.0]. (13.3.20)This formula includes NLO QCD corrections to theQCDP contributions and NNLO contributions to EWP482 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGones mentioned previously. The coefficients in this for-mula and the parameters B(1/2)6 and B(3/2)8 , conven-tionally normalized to unity at the factorization scale,are scale dependent. Here we will setµ∗ = 1 GeV be-cause at this scale it is most convenient to compare thevalues forB(1/2)6 and B(3/2)8 obtained in the three non-perturbativeapproachesLQCD,ChPTandDQCDthatwe already encountered in the context of the∆I = 1/2rule.
TheB(1/2)6 andB(3/2)8 representtherelevanthadronicmatrix elements of the dominant QCDP and EWP op-erators, respectively:Q6 = (¯sαdβ)V−A∑q=u,d,s,c,b(¯qβqα)V+A, (13.3.21)Q8 = 32 (¯sαdβ)V−A∑q=u,d,s,c,beq(¯qβqα)V+A, (13.3.22)with V −A= γµ(1 −γ5) and V + A= γµ(1 + γ5). Theyare then left-right operators with large hadronic matrixelements which assures their dominance over left-leftoperators. The remaining QCDP and EWP operators,represented here by−2.9 and −2.0, respectively, playsubleading roles. Current-current operators Q1,2 thatplayed crucial role in the case of the∆I = 1 /2 rule donot contribute toε′/ε because their WCs are real. Inobtaining the formulae in Eqns. (13.3.19) and (13.3.20)it is common to use the experimental values for thereal parts of A0,2 in Eqn. ( 13.3.3). Finally, Imλt =Im(V∗tsVtd) ≈1.4 ×10−4.
There are two main reasons whyQ8 can competewith Q6 here despite the smallness of the electroweakcouplings in the WC ofQ8 relative to the QCD one inthe WC ofQ6. In the basic formula (13.3.15) for ε′/εits contribution is enhanced relative to theQ6’s one bythe factor ReA0/ReA2 = 22 .4. In addition its WC isenhanced for the large top-quark mass which is not thecase forQ6 [4121, 4122].
In the three non-perturbative approaches the valuesof B(1/2)6 and B(3/2)8 were found atµ= 1 GeV to be:B(1/2)6 (1 GeV) = 1 .49 ±0.25,(RBC-UKQCD−2020)B(3/2)8 (1 GeV) = 0 .85 ±0.05 .
B(1/2)6 (1 GeV) = 1 .35 ±0.20,, (ChPT−2019)B(3/2)8 (1 GeV) = 0 .55 ±0.20 .
B(1/2)6 (1 GeV) ≤0.6, (DQCD−2015)B(3/2)8 (1 GeV) = 0 .80 ±0.10 .
(13.3.23)While the largeB(1/2)6 and B(3/2)8 <1.0 from LQCDhas until now no physical interpretation, the patternfound in ChPT results apparently from final state in-teractions (FSI) that enhanceB(1/2)6 above unity andsuppress B(3/2)8 below it [4137–4140]. The suppressionofB(1/2)6 andB(3/2)8 belowunityintheDQCDapproachcomesfromthemesonevolution[ 4141]whichisrequiredto have a proper matching with the WCs of QCDPand EWP operators. The meson evolution is absent inpresent ChPT calculations and it is argued in [4142]that including it in ChPT calculations will lowerB(1/2)6below unity. On the other hand adding non-leading FSIin the DQCD approach would raiseB(1/2)6 above 0.6.
Nevertheless B(1/2)6 ≤1.0 is expected to be satisfiedeven after the inclusion of FSI in DQCD.
Moreover, while ChPT and DQCD useˆΩ(8)eﬀ = (17 ±9) 10−2 and ˆΩ(9)eﬀ = (29 ±7) 10−2, respectively, as al-ready stated above, RBC-UKQCD still usesˆΩeﬀ = 0.
These differences in the values ofB(1/2)6 , B(3/2)8 andˆΩeﬀ imply significant differences inε′/ε presented bythese three groups:(ε′/ε)SM = (21.7 ±8.4) ×10−4 (13.3.24)from the RBC-UKQCD collaboration [3962] which usesˆΩeﬀ = 0 . Here statistical, parametric and systematicuncertainties have been added in quadrature. Next(ε′/ε)SM = (14 ±5) ×10−4 (13.3.25)from ChPT [4135]. The large error is related to theproblematic matching of LD and SD contributions inthis approach which can be traced back to the absenceof meson evolution in this approach. Finally(ε′/ε)SM = (5 ±2) ·10−4, (13.3.26)from DQCD [4112, 4141, 4142], whereB(1/2)6 ≤1.0 hasbeen used.
While the results in Eqns. (13.3.24) and (13.3.25)arefullyconsistentwiththedatashowninEqn.( 13.3.14),the DQCD result in Eqn. (13.3.26) implies a significantanomaly and NP at work. Clearly, the confirmation ofthe DQCD result is highly important.
Let us end this presentation with good news. Thereis a very good agreement between LQCD and DQCD asfar as EWP contribution toε′/εis concerned. This im-plies that this contribution toε′/ε, that is unaffected byleading isospin breaking corrections, is already knownwithin the SM with acceptable accuracy:(ε′/ε)EWPSM = −(7 ±1) ×10−4 ,(LQCD and DQCD). (13.3.27)BecausebothLQCDandDQCDcanperformmuchbet-ter in the case of EWP than in the case of QCDP Iexpect that this result will remain with us for the com-ing years. On the other hand, the value from ChPT of13.4 The role of QCD inB physics anomalies 483B(3/2)8 ≈0.55 [4135] implies using Eqn. (13.3.20) thatthe EWP contribution is roughly by a factor of 2 belowthe result in Eqn. (13.3.27).
Let us hope that at the 60th birthday of QCD wewill know which prediction is right. Further summariescan be found in [3963,3966,4112] and details in originalreferences.
13.4 The role of QCD in B physics anoma-liesDanny van Dyk and Javier VirtoThe so-calledb →sℓ+ℓ− anomalies present one of thefew current tensions between theory predictions withinthe SM and experimental measurements. They repre-sent long-standing tensions that first presented them-selves in a 2013 publication by the LHCb collabora-tion [4143]. Here, we discuss how QCD plays a centralrole at every stage of the interpretation of these anoma-lies.
QCD and hadronic physics enter the theory predic-tions, both in the SM and beyond, in one of three ways:– First, they enter the Weak Effective field Theory(WET)descriptionofneutral-currentprocesses,suchas b → sℓ+ℓ−. The effective Hamiltonian at theleading-mass dimension six readsHWET = 4GF√2 VtbV∗ts∑iCiQi, (13.4.1)with local operatorsQi and Wilson coefficientsCi.
It includes semileptonic operators,Q9(10) = e216π2 [¯sγµPLb] [¯µγµ(γ5)µ] , (13.4.2)electromagnetic dipole operators,Q7 = e16π2 [¯sσµνPRb] Fµν, (13.4.3)and four-quark operatorsQ1q(2q) = [¯qγµPLb] [¯sγµPLq] . (13.4.4)QCD has a substantial effect on the matching ofthe WET to the SM [4144–4146]. For instance, atthe low scaleµb ≃5 GeV, about half of the valueof C9 is generated by QCD effects due to operatorrunning and mixing of the four-quark operators intoQ9 [4144].
Here we discuss only the numerically leading oper-ators needed for a description within the SM. BSMeffects are encoded in the values of the Wilson coef-ficients or through additional operators with a dif-ferent spin structure.
– Second, they enter the hadronic matrix elements oflocal ¯sboperators, c.f. Eq. (13.4.8). These matrix el-ements are then expressed in terms of scalar-valuedform factors, which are functions of the momentumtransfer (typically:q2). The¯sbform factors are verysimilar to the form factors arising in the descriptionof exclusive charged-current semileptonic processessuch asb→cµ−¯ν.
– Third, they enter the hadronic form factors of non-local ¯sb operators, c.f. Eq. (13.4.10). These opera-tors arise in the time-ordered product of the four-quark operators and the electromagnetic current.
Theyhavenocorrespondenceincharged-currentsemilep-tonic decays and currently present the biggest ob-stacletoaccurate andprecise theoreticalpredictionsof exclusiveb→sµ+µ− decays.
In the following, we do not further discuss the effectivefield theory description, which is well established. Thematching coefficients to NNLO in QCD can be foundin Refs. [4144–4146]. Instead, we focus on the secondand third type of QCD effects in exclusiveb →sℓ+ℓ−processes.
13.4.1 Anatomy of exclusive b→sℓ+ℓ− processes¯Bs → µ+µ−Amongst the exclusiveb→sℓ+ℓ− decays, the cleanestones from a theory perspective are the purely leptonicdecays ¯Bs →ℓ+ℓ−. Up to QED corrections [4147], allQCD effects are containedin a single local hadronic ma-trixelement.Thismatrixelementiscommonlyparametrisedin terms of theBq-meson decay constantfBq [279]⟨0|¯qγµγ5b⏐⏐¯Bq(p)⟩= ifBqpµ. (13.4.5)It has been calculated ab-initio from lattice QCD sim-ulations. Several analyses with Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 lightquark flavours have become available [655, 672, 673,1432, 4148]. Their world average [279]fBs = 230.3 ±1.3 MeV, (13.4.6)is dominated by a single analysis published by the Fer-milab/MILC collaboration [655].
This constant has been computed using a variety oflattice QCD techniques, which have presently reached aprecision of 0.5%. The current theoretical uncertaintyon the muonic branching ratio is no longer governedby hadronic physics. Instead, it is dominated by CKMmatrix elements. The theory predictions have reachedthe level of 5% [4147], which is much smaller than theuncertainty of the average of the results by the LHCexperiments of ∼ 13% [4149]. While ¯Bs → µ+µ− isnot sensitive to the Wilson coefficientC9 (to leading or-der in QED [4147]), it does constrain very strongly the484 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGscalar and pseudoscalar operators, and indirectly alsoC10, which has an impact on the global interpretationsof theb→sµ+µ− anomalies.
¯B → Mµ+µ−Amongst the exclusive semileptonicb→sℓ+ℓ− decays,B-meson decays to either a pseudoscalar (P) or a vec-tor (V) meson are presently the best understood. Com-pared to the purely leptonic decay ¯Bs →µ+µ−, theadditional meson in the final state provides the oppor-tunity to test the SM through a larger number of ob-servables that arise in the differential decay rates. Thedownside for is – generally – an increased sensitivityto QCD effects in their theoretical description, whichleads to larger theoretical uncertainties.
To leading order in QED, the matrix elements of thesemileptonic and radiative operatorsQ7,9,10 factorise.
A useful schematic decomposition of the amplitude isgiven by [4150]A( ¯B →Mℓ+ℓ−) ∼GF VtbV∗ts[(C9 LµV + C10 LµA) Fµ−LµVq2 2imbC7 FT,µ + 16π2Hµ]. (13.4.7)Here LµV(A) = [ ¯ℓγµ(γ5)ℓ] are leptonic currents, and ageneralizationtooperatorsbeyondtheSMcanbefoundin Ref. [4151]. In the above, we use the hadronic matrixelementsFµB→M(k,q) ≡⟨M(k)|¯sγµPLb⏐⏐¯B(p)⟩, (13.4.8)FT,µB→M(k,q) ≡⟨M(k)|¯sσµνqνPRb⏐⏐¯B(p)⟩, (13.4.9)HµB→M(k,q) ≡i∫d4xeiq·x (13.4.10)⟨M(k)|T{jemµ (x),∑iCiQi(0)}⏐⏐¯B(p)⟩with i= 1 q,2q,... , which arise from the semileptonic,radiative, and four-quark operators in that orderThe first two matrix elements are classified as localmatrix elements, and the last one as a non-local ma-trix element. Both types of matrix elements are neededfor reliable and accurate predictions of the amplitudesand therefore of the observables in semileptonic decays.
For phenomenological discussions, one commonly en-counters projections of the hadronic amplitudes ontosome basis of scalar form factors, either the helicitybasis [4152] or more commonly the transversity ba-sis [4153–4155]. The number of independent amplitudesdepends on the angular momentum of the initial and fi-nal state hadrons. The form factors are functions of themomentum transfer from the hadronic system to theleptons. This functional dependence is commonly ex-pressed in terms ofq2, the squared mass of the leptonpair.
The process B →Kℓ+ℓ− is the most reliably un-derstood one amongst the exclusive semileptonicb →sℓ+ℓ− decays. Both theB and K meson are stable inthe absence of weak interactions, which facilitates thedetermination of their hadronic form factors. Conser-vation of angular momentum limits this process to twoamplitudes: the dominant longitudinally polarized am-plitude and the lepton-mass suppressed time-like am-plitude [4156]. As a consequence, the process providesonly a few independent observables.
The processesB →K∗ℓ+ℓ− and Bs →φℓ+ℓ− bothfeature a vector meson in the final state. Compared toB → Kℓ+ℓ−, two further transversely-polarized am-plitudes can contribute. This more complex structureleads to numerous independent observables arising fromthe differential decay rate [4153–4155, 4157]. However,this enriched phenomenological reach comes at the ex-pense of somewhat larger uncertainties in the individ-ual hadronic form factors. Since both the K∗ and φare not stable in the absence of weak interactions, theirdescription as a “quasi stable” state incurs additionaltheoretical uncertainty [4158]. Here, theK∗ is substan-tially more affected than theφ, due to the hierarchy oftheir hadronic decay widths.
13.4.2 Hadronic Matrix ElementsLocal form factors Local form factors for B →K, B →K∗ and Bs →φ transitions are accessible atlow values of q2 ≲ 10 GeV2 [1231] with two differentcontinuum QCD methods.
First, QCD factorisation (QCDF) provides a meansto relate the various form factors to each other. This re-lation emerged from a symmetry amongst currents in-volving one collinear and one heavy quark field [4159].
The breaking of this symmetry occurs due to two ef-fects:(a)contributionsbeyondleadingorderinthestrongcoupling constant, which involves interactions betweenthe quarks inherent to the transition with the speca-tor quark [4160]; and (b) contributions beyond leadingpower in the double expansion in theb-quark mass andthe energy E of the final-state hadron within theB-meson rest frame. Early predictions for exclusiveb →sℓ+ℓ− decays relied heavily on the QCDF relations,to construct so-called “clean” observables; i.e., observ-ables in which local hadronic form factors cancel ap-proximately [4161–4163]. Most famously, theP′i basisof observables in the ¯B →K∗ℓ+ℓ− angular distribu-tion [4163] makes use of this cancellation. TheP′5 ob-13.4 The role of QCD inB physics anomalies 485servable [4164] is commonly used to illustrate the ten-sions between SM predictions and measurements.
Second, light-cone QCD sum rules (LCSR) are usedto predict the full set of local form factors inB →K,B →K∗ andBs →φtransitions.Twodifferentversionsof LCSRs can be employed [1230, 4165], which differin the choice of the interpolating current. The LCSRswith B-meson interpolation involve hadronic matrix el-ements for the final-state hadron, i.e., theK, K∗ and φ.
These sum rules are presently better understood thantheir competitors, leading to overall smallerparamet-ric uncertainties. However, the sum rules with vector-meson final states suffer from hard-to-quantify system-atic uncertainties due to the unstable nature of thesestate. The competing LCSRs with interpolation of thefinal-state hadronsK, K∗, andφ have not yet reachedthe same level of sophistication [3987].
It remains to be emphasized that both types of LC-SRs suffer from systematic uncertainties that are dif-ficult to assess. It is commonly understood that theLCSR results serve as a stop gap, to be replaced byresults from more systematic approaches to QCD.
Lattice QCD provides such a systematic approachto the local form factors. However, it is presently lim-ited to large values ofq2 ≳ 12 GeV2 [3984, 4166, 4167],which is not an inherent limitation of the method. Lat-tice QCD results for the decays B → K∗ℓ+ℓ− andBs →φℓ+ℓ−, which are of great phenomenological in-terest are restricted to this range. However, a very re-centstudyofthe B →Kformfactors[ 3988]forthefirsttime accesses the fullq2 range available to the semilep-tonic decay. Their results are in good agreement withprevious LCSR estimates, with smaller uncertainties.
Having constraints on the form factors at oppositeends of the semileptonic phase space it is natural toask if these constraints are mutually compatible. Thisposes an interpolation problem. ForB-meson decays,this problem is usually addressed using the so-calledz-expansion [4169]. Usingq2 ↦→z(q2; t0,t+) ≡√t+ −q2 −√t+ −t0√t+ −q2 + √t+ −t0(13.4.11)thefirstRiemannsheetofthecomplex q2 planeismappedonto the unit disk inz. A Taylor expansion of the form-factors in z, after removal of any physical poles, con-verges quickly and provides some control of the interpo-lation error. Studies of theB →V form factors find rea-sonable to good agreement between the available LCSRand lattice QCD results [3987, 4165, 4168], which is notsurprising given the large uncertainties attached to theformer. An example of such a fit from Ref. [4168] isdisplayed in Figure 13.4.1, showcasing the agreementbetween lattice QCD and LCSR results.
−15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15 20q2 [GeV2]0.20.30.40.50.60.7AB→K∗1 (q2)EOS v1.0.3This workBSZ 2015LCSR (GKvD 2018)LQCD (HLMW 2015)Fig. 13.4.1 Simultaneous fit to lattice QCD and LCSR re-sults for the localB → K∗ form factorA1 ∝ F∥, taken fromRef. [4168].
−7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5q2 [GeV2]−0.00010.00000.00010.00020.00030.0004Re H∥/F∥EOS v1.0.3GvDV 2020Fig. 13.4.2 Fit to the non-localB → K∗ form factor H∥,produced from Ref. [4168].
Future prospects on the theoretical precision for lo-cal form factors rely dominantly on the expected im-provements from the Lattice QCD side. These includeenlarging the accessibleq2 range (as recently achievedfor the B →K form factors) and accounting for thenon-zero width of the vector final states [509]. The ef-fect due to a non-zeroρ and K∗ width on theB →ππand B →Kπ form factors was recently critically dis-cussed within the setup of LCSRs with final-state inter-polation, estimating corrections to the zero-width limitof up to10% in the case of theK∗ [4158, 4170, 4171].486 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGNon-local Hadronic Matrix ElementsNon-local form factors are significantly more diffi-cult to approach theoretically [4172–4175]. The reasonis the large number of virtual and on-shell intermedi-ate states that contribute to the time-ordered productin Eq. (13.4.10)s. This non-local operator is commonlyseparated by the electric charge of the quark flavor towhich the electro-magnetic current couples:T{jemµ (x),∑i=1q,2q,...
CiQi(0)}≡K(x)≡QcKc(x) + QbsKbs(x) + ... . (13.4.12)In the above, the dots indicate contributions due toup and down quarks, which are suppressed by CKMmatrixelementorthesmallWilsoncoefficientsofQCD-penguin four-quark operators. The terms proportionalto bottom and strange-quark charges are only gaugeinvariant when considered in sum, leading to the jointdescription with labelbs. Our labelling of the non-localform factors follows from the above, i.e., Hλ,c arisesfrom the hadronic matrix element of the operatorKc.
The first systematic approach to the non-local formfactors has been provided in Ref. [4172, 4176], whichis expected to work for small values ofq2 sufficientlyfar below the open charm threshold. This approachwas subsequently developed into a light-cone Opera-tor Product Expansion (OPE) of the non-local operatorEq. (13.4.12) [4172, 4173]. This expansion is shown tobreak down asq2 approaches the partonic open charmthreshold from below. The hadronic matrix elementsof the next-to-leading operator in this light-cone OPEhave been calculated within a LCSR approach [4173,4177]. The most recent calculation indicated that theterm at next-to-leading power is negligible in compari-son to the leading-power term.
At q2 = O(m2b) ≳ 4m2c, an OPE in term of local op-erators applies [4174, 4175]. The simple structure of theOPE leads to phenomenologically powerful theory pre-dictions [4162, 4178, 4179]. However, the fact that thisregion of phase space lays on the open-charm branchcut leads to considerable complications in the inter-pretation of experimental measurements. Chiefly, onecannot expect that the OPE result agrees with naturelocally, i.e., in everyq2 point [4175]. Instead of such lo-cal duality,semi-local quark-hadron duality is assumed,i.e., the OPE prediction integrated over a sufficientlylarge q2 range is expected to correspond to theq2 inte-grated observables [4175]. Nevertheless, this approachgives rise to large unquantifiable systematic uncertain-ties in the theory predictions [4180, 4181]. Due to theselimitations, commonly a single bin covering the wholelow-q2 region is used in the BSM analyses. However,the q2 spectrum can be used to test the level of “dualityviolation”, i.e., the disagreement between the perturba-tive partonic prediction and the hadronic spectrum. Inthis way, reliable estimates of these intrinsically non-perturbative effects are obtained. Ref. [4181] uses allcurrently available data onB →K∗µµ at low recoiland finds agreement between data and the OPE pre-diction within∼20% in all the bins.
The first parametrizations of theq2 dependence ofthe non-local form factors Hλ,c are based on a dis-persion relation [4173] or an expansion in powers ofq2 [4152]. A subsequent publication proposes to applya conformal mapping similar to Eq. (13.4.11) [ 4182],very similar to what is done for the local form factors.
The dispersive andz-expansion approaches are consis-tent with analyticity and therefore permit using ad-ditional data, such as measurements of the branchingratios and angular distributions ofB →ψM processes,wereψ= {J/ψ,ψ(2S)}. In Ref. [4182] it is shown quan-titatively how this information can be useda priori toproduce data-assisted theory predictions for the non-local effect independent of NP, or a posteriori to fitall the B →ψK∗ and B →K∗µ+µ− spectra up toq2 = m2ψ(2S) simultaneously to the hadronic parametersand NP. In this last approach, short- and long-distanceeffects are disentangled by the experimental input fromB →ψK∗, the fixedq2 dependence of the NP contri-bution, and by the theory constraints at negativeq2.
A notable byproduct is the fact that experimental databetween the two narrow charmonia can be used in theanalyses. An application of thez-expansion, includingnewly derived dispersive bounds on the expansion co-efficients [4177], has been used in Ref. [4168] to chal-lenge the experimental measurements of various exclu-sive semileptonicb→sℓ+ℓ− decays. This parametriza-tion yields results that are compatible with analysesbased on a perturbative treatment, albeit with some-what larger uncertainties. A representative example ofthe non-local form factors obtained in this way is shownin Figure 13.4.2. The impact of these improved deter-minations of non-local form factors on the global fitsto separate exclusive b →sµµ modes has been stud-ied in Ref. [4168] and it is shown inFigure 13.4.3. Theoverall picture of significant tensions between data andthe SM expectation seen in the literature [4183–4187]are confirmed.
The prospects for this data-driven approach withthe future data from LHCb, including the prospects ofdoing without theory input altogether, have been stud-ied in [4188]. The conclusion is that unbinned analy-ses can infer knowledge about both QCD and poten-tial BSM effects in these decays simultaneously. Thehigh statistics studies ofb→sµµ exclusive transitionsat the LHC, either with fineq2 binning or unbinned,13.5 QCD and (g− 2) of the muon 487−2 −1 0 1Re CBSM9−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Re CBSM10EOS v1.0.3SMB → Kµµ + Bs → µµB → K∗µµBs → φµµFig. 13.4.3 Overview of the tensions between NP parame-ters and the SM expectation for three representative processes.
Taken from Ref. [4168], which takes into account a parametriza-tion of the non-local effects in the fits.
will therefore not only probe for BSM effects but alsofurther our understanding of the non-local form fac-tors. While current global fits to differentq2 bins showconsistency with the current treatment of non-local ef-fects [4189], future LHC data will require, and provide,a higher level of control over them.
Data-driven and joint theoretical and data-drivenmethods have been proposed in an effort to control theuncertainties [4177, 4182, 4190–4192]. Some of thesemethods will be possible and improve significantly withthe high statistics collected at LHCb after the upgrade.
They are all based on precise measurements of theq2spectra, together with a theoretically motivated para-metrization of theq2 dependence of the amplitudes anda theory benchmark that allows to separate short- fromlong-distance contributions.
Finally,varioushadronicmodelshavebeenproposedto analyse parts or the entire q2 phase space. Someof these analyses are carried out within the “Krüger-Sehgal” (naive factorization) approach [4193], which al-lows to use data on the R(s) ratio in e+e− annihi-lation [4175, 4180, 4181]. These models have recentlybeen refined to account also for light-meson intermedi-ate states [4194]. Notably, future precision data fromthe LHC with the expected fine binning will be essen-tial in refining these data-driven methods and disentan-gle potential BSM contributions, with the prospects ofconfirming or refuting a BSM origin to theb →sµµanomalies.
13.5 QCD and ( g −2) of the muonAchim Denig and Harvey MeyerThe anomalous magnetic moment of the muon, asone of the most precisely measured quantities in funda-mental physics, has been at the forefront of testing theStandard Model (SM) of particle physics for decades[4195]. The proportionality factor g ·e/(2m) betweenthe spin and the magnetic moment of an elementaryparticle is predicted in Dirac’s theory of the electron tosatisfy g = 2 . Already the deviation of the electron’sg factor from this prediction played a central role intesting Quantum Electrodynamics at one loop [4196].
It was understood early on [4197, 4198] that the contri-bution of virtual particles much heavier than the lep-ton l would be suppressed as(ml/mheavy)2. Hence thestrong interest in the analogous property of the muon,denotedaµ = (g−2)µ/2, given that the 207 times largermass of the muon strongly enhances the virtual contri-butions from particles upward from the mass scale of afew MeV/c2, and thus provides access to potential new-physics contributions. Since the very first measurementof1960[ 4199],experimentshaverefinedtheirsensitivityto aµ, thereby successively testing contributions fromall sectors of the SM, and making this observable theparadigmatic example of searching for new physics atthe precision frontier.
The experimental measurements of aµ [4200] relyon the muon spin precessing relative to the directionof the muon momentum under the influence of a staticmagnetic field: the precession frequency is directly pro-portional toaµ. The observation that the (undesirable)impactofanelectricfieldonthemuonspinprecessionissuppressed at a special muon momentum of 3.1GeV/c[4201] eventually led to the third muon storage ringexperiment at CERN [4202], which for the first timeprobed hadronic effects, among which the hadronic vac-uum polarization (HVP) provides the leading contri-bution. Progress in the experimental techniques culmi-natedintheBrookhavenE821experiment[ 4203],whichachieved a precision of 0.54ppm onaµ.
Meanwhile,theSMpredictionfor aµ hadbeenwork-ed out to a very similar degree of precision, as describedin the 2009 review [4204]. The QED contribution, byfar dominant, and the weak contribution having beencalculated to sufficiently high order, the uncertainty ofthe SM prediction has been entirely dominated by thehadronic contributions, specifically by the HVP and bythehadroniclight-by-light(HLbL)contributions,whichare both illustrated in Fig.13.5.1. A tension at the levelof 3.2 standard deviations was found between the ex-perimental and the theoretical value ofaµ [4204].488 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGµµγµµγ≈µµγπ0,η ,η′+...
µµγµµγA′LL11µµγµµγ≈µµγπ0,η ,η′+...
µµγµµγA′LL11Fig. 13.5.1Feynman diagrams representing the two contribu-tions that currently saturate the uncertainty of the SM pre-diction for the muon(g− 2): the hadronic vacuum polariza-tion (left),aHVP,LOµ , and the hadronic light-by-light contribu-tions (right), aHLbLµ . Solid lines represent muon propagatorsand wavy lines photon propagators. The external photon linerepresents the magnetic field of the experiment, which probesthe magnetic moment of the muon.
In the past decade, a new experimental effort wasundertaken in an attempt to clarify the situation. TheFermilab experiment E989 [4205] was designed with thegoal of reaching a precision of 0.14ppm onaµ. In or-der to arrive at an up-to-date prediction before the an-nouncement of the first results by the Fermilab experi-ment,the (g−2) TheoryInitiativewaslaunchedin2017,which led to the 2020 Theory White Paper [4206]. Thetheory precision had by then improved to the level of0.37ppm, and the tension with the world experimentalaverage (dominated by the Brookhaven measurement)was found to be at the3.7 σ level.
The Fermilab(g−2) experiment announced its firstresult on April 7, 2021. Its measurement ofaµ [4207]at the 0.46ppm level slightly surpassed the precision ofthe Brookhaven measurement [4203] and led to the sit-uation illustrated in Fig.13.5.2. The new measurementagrees well with the older Brookhaven one, and the ten-sion with the SM prediction (from the 2020 White Pa-per [4206]) has increased to the level of4.2 σ, oraµ(Exp)−aµ(WP 2020) = (25 .1±5.9)×10−10 (13.5.1)in absolute size. From here, it might seem like the nextexperimental update by the Fermilab experiment couldfinally raise the tension above the conventional ‘discov-ery’ level of five standard deviations.
However, on the same day as the announcement ofthe experimental result from Fermilab, a lattice QCDcalculation of the HVP contribution with a compet-itive precision was published [4208], which, taken atface value, would increase the SM prediction foraµ andbring it into better agreement (at the1.5 σ level) withtheexperimentalworldaverage.Instead,thetensionbe-tween this lattice QCD calculation and the dispersive,data-drivenevaluationunderlyingtheWhitePaperpre-diction ofaµ amounts to2.1 σ (see Eq. (13.5.7) below).
17.5 18.0 18.5 19.0 19.5 20.0 20.5 21.0 21.54.2a × 1091165900Standard Model ExperimentAverageBNL g-2FNAL g-2Fig. 13.5.2 Status ofaµ after the 2021 FNAL measurement.
ThetensionbetweentheexperimentalaverageoftheFNALandthe 2001 BNL measurements with the Standard Model predic-tion provided by the Theory White Paper amounts to 4.2 stan-dard deviations. Figure from [4207].
Thus it is the intricacies of hadron-photon interactionsthat are currently limiting the resolving power of themuon (g−2) to probe new physics. In section13.5.1,we describe how the evidence for a genuine differencebetween lattice calculations of the HVP and its dis-persive evaluation has strengthened significantly in thepast eighteen months. Obviously, finding the origin ofthis difference is of utmost importance in the ongoingsaga of the muon(g−2).
We begin by reviewing the status of the HVP con-tribution toaµ in section13.5.1, whereafter we describethe progress made in the HLbL contribution in section13.5.2. We close with some concluding remarks and anoutlook on the near future of the subject.
13.5.1 The hadronic vacuum polarization contri-butionThe leading contribution toaµ is given by Schwinger’sresult α/(2π) ≃0.00116 [4196]. In contrast, the HVPcontribution toaµ only amounts to about700 ×10−10,but given the precision expected from the ongoing Fer-milab experiment and the upcoming J-PARC [4209] ex-periment, the target for the HVP contributionaHVP,LOµis a precision of1.5 ×10−10, or 0.2%. This representsa major challenge for a strong-interaction effect, whichhas been addressed by the long-established data-drivendispersive method and by ab initio lattice QCD meth-ods.13.5 QCD and (g− 2) of the muon 489Dispersive determinationThe dispersiveapproach to computingaHVP,LOµ is basedon the expressionaHVP,LOµ =(αmµ3π)2 ∫ ∞m2π0dss2ˆK(s/m2µ) R(s), (13.5.2)R(s) = σ(e+e− →hadrons)4πα(s)2/(3s) . (13.5.3)The dimensionless functionˆKis a smooth function thatincreases monotonically from the value 0.63 at the4m2πthreshold to unity in the limits →∞. The determi-nation of R(s) requires measurements of the hadroniccross section in e+e− collisions, σ(e+e− →hadrons).
Given the1/s2 dependence in the dispersion integrand,low-energy contributions of the hadronic cross sectionhave a very strong weight and therefore have to beknown to high accuracy. The most relevant channels arethe exclusive reactionse+e− →π+π−,3π,4π, andK ¯K,for all of which the cross section is peaked at√s <2GeV.
The channel e+e− → π+π− is dominated by theρ(770) intermediate state and contributes to more than70% to the dispersion integral. Fig.13.5.3shows variousrecentmeasurementsofthetwo-pioncrosssectionintheρ peak region between 600 and 900 MeV. Two classesof measurements are shown in Fig.13.5.3. These areenergy scan measurements (CMD-2 [4210–4213], SND[4214]), in which the center-of-mass energy of the col-lider (in this case the VEPP-2M collider in Novosibirsk)is systematically varied to cover the energy range understudy. A second class of measurements (KLOE [4215],BABAR [4216, 4217], BESIII [4218]) is carried out withthe colliders running at a fixed center-of-mass energyand by exploiting events in which the initial beam elec-trons or positrons have radiated a highly energetic pho-ton, lowering in such a way the available hadronic massin the final state. This method is called initial-state ra-diation (ISR) or radiative return and has been appliedmost successfully at modern particle factories [4219]. Inthe past, also spectral functions from hadronicτ decayshave been used [4220] in the phenomenological determi-nationofHVP,sincethesecanberelatedto R(s) viatheConserved Vector Current theorem. However, since thephenomenological estimates of the isospin correctionsare not well understood, the recent determinations ofHVP were obtained without the use of hadronicτ data.
Fig. 13.5.3 demonstrates the very high precision ofthe data. However, sizeable discrepancies have been ob-served for the cross-section integral contributing to Eq.
(13.5.2). This is demonstrated in Fig.13.5.4, where thetwo-pion contribution to HVP,aππ,LOµ , in the ρ peakregion between 600 and 900 MeV is shown for the indi-vidual experiments as well as for two combinations of 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9σ 0(e+e- → π +π -) [nb]√ s [GeV]KLOE combination (uncertainty band)CMD-2 (03)SND (04)CMD-2 (06)BaBar (09)BESIII (15)KLOE combinationFig. 13.5.3 Recent experimental data on the cross sectionσ(e+e− → π+π−) in the energy range between 600 and 900MeV. The interference of theρ decay with the two-pion decayof theω(780) is well visible as a structure around theω mass.
Figure taken from [4215]; a new SND analysis [4221] from theVEPP-2000 collider and an ISR analysis from CLEO [4222] arenot yet shown.
the data sets (KNT 19 [4223] and DHMZ 19 [4224]). Es-pecially the two most precise determinations of the two-pion cross section from the KLOE [4215] and BABAR[4216, 4217] collaborations happen to exhibit a signif-icant deviation, which currently limits the overall pre-cision of the dispersive determination of HVP. Further-more, given the tensions in the experimental data sets,systematic effects have to be considered in the aver-aging procedures. In Ref. [4206] a conservative mergingprocedure was applied to reflect the differences betweenthe evaluations in Refs. [4223] and [4224]. The TheoryWhite Paper [4206] estimate for the LO HVP contribu-tion is solely based on the dispersive approach [4223–4228] and readsaHVP,LOµ = (693.1 ±4.0) ×10−10.
Fortunately, new experimental measurements of thetwo-pion channel are expected in the near future byCMD-3, SND, BABAR, BESIII, and BELLE-II. It re-mains to be seen whether the currently existing dis-crepancy between BABAR and KLOE can be resolved.
Provided the upcoming data sets reach the precisionlevel of 0.5% and agree with each other, the total un-certainty of the HVP contribution obtained via the dis-persive approach would decrease from currently 0.6%to 0.3% or better.
Lattice QCD calculationSince the HVP contribution to the muon(g −2) in-volves only spacelike photons, it is a natural quantityto be calculated in lattice QCD [4232], which is formu-lated in Euclidean space. Although initially expressedin momentum space, the master formula now used al-most exclusively is in the ‘time-momentum representa-490 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXING360 365 370 375 380 385 390 395 400 405a , LO(600 900 MeV) [10 10]CMD-2 03/06SND 04BABAR 09CLEO 18KLOE 18BESIII 20372.4 ± 3.0371.7 ± 5.0376.7 ± 2.7376.9 ± 6.3366.9 ± 2.1368.2 ± 3.6KNT 19DHMZ 19369.8 ± 1.3371.5 ± 2.8Fig. 13.5.4 Comparison of aππ,LOµ in the energy range be-tween 600 and 900 MeV. The upper part of the plot showsthe values of recent experimental measurements in this energyrange [4210, 4213–4218, 4222], while the lower two values inred and blue are the estimates of the KNT [4206, 4223] andDHMZ [4206, 4224] groups, which carry out a merging proce-dure of the available data. In the case of DHMZ an additionalsystematic uncertainty has been included to account for theKLOE/BABAR tension. Please note that the KLOE value isthe combination of the three analyses published in Ref.s [4229–4231]tion’ [4233],aHVP,LOµ =( απmµ)2 ∫ ∞0dtG(t) K(mµt), (13.5.4)G(t) = 133∑i=k∫d3x⟨jemk (t,⃗ x) jemk†(0)⟩, (13.5.5)where jemk = 23 ¯uγku−13¯dγkd−13 ¯sγks+ ... is a spa-tial component of the electromagnetic current carriedby the quarks, and the dimensionless weight functionK(ˆt) is known analytically in terms of Meijer’s function[4234]. It is proportional toˆt4 for arguments well belowunity, and toˆt2 for arguments well above unity, thusstrongly enhancing the long-distance contribution. Thespectral representation [4233]G(t) =∫ ∞0ds sR(s)12π2e−√st2√s (13.5.6)between the Euclidean correlator and theRratio allowsfor detailed comparisons between the dispersive and thelattice approach.
The recipe for computing aHVP,LOµ on the latticethus appears remarkably simple. However, many effectsmust be controlled to reach the subpercent level of pre-cision, including discretization and finite-size effects, aswell as the leading effects of the unequal up and downquark masses and of the electromagnetic interactionsamong quarks. The state-of-the-art lattice calculationsavailable at the time of the 2020 White Paper had un-certainties of two percent and larger [4235–4243]. Whilethey had a tendency to lie above the dispersive esti-mates, they were broadly consistent with them. TheBMW collaboration achieved a reduction of the uncer-tainty of its lattice calculation down to the 0.8% leveland published its result in 2021 [4208]. The differencewith the White Paper result amounts toaHVP,LOµ (BMW′21) −aHVP,LOµ (WP′20)= (14.4 ±6.8) ×10−10. (13.5.7)At this point, an independent lattice calculation at thesame level of precision would be extremely desirable tohelp clarify the situation.
Both the very short and the very long distances posedistinct challenges to a lattice calculation [4233]. Giventhe difficulties associated with controlling the statis-tical and systematic errors of the tail of the correla-tor G(t), the lattice community has adopted the strat-egy of partitioning the Euclidean-time axis into inter-vals, whose contributions toaHVP,LOµ are individuallymore tractable. This strategy was first applied in Ref.
[4237]. In particular, an intermediate interval from 0.4to 1.0fm (with smooth edges of width 0.15fm) was cho-sen, thus defining the ‘window observable’, which repre-sents about one third of the totalaHVP,LOµ . This quan-tity has received a lot of attention, especially since theBMW collaboration found a discrepancy of 3.7 stan-darddeviationswiththedispersiveestimate[ 4208].Sincethen, the Mainz/CLS [4244] and the ETM collabora-tion have computed the window observable on the lat-tice. The results are summarized in Fig. 13.5.5. TheRBC/UKQCD collaboration has recently presented anupdate [4245] based on a blinded analysis, indicating anupward shift in the (dominant) light-quark connectedcontribution from(202.9±1.4)×10−10 to(206.5±0.7)×10−10 (where we have added their errors in quadrature)and bringing their result into good agreement with theother lattice calculations displayed in Fig.13.5.5.
Discussion HVPBeyond the 2.1 σ tension of Eq. (13.5.7)) between thedata-driven evaluation ofaHVP,LOµ [4206] and the lat-tice QCD based BMW calculation [4208], a statisticallymore significant tension between lattice QCD and dis-persion theory has arisen in the partial contributionknown as the ‘window quantity’. The latter has beencomputed independently by several lattice collabora-tions, whose results are in good mutual agreement butdisagree with the R-ratio based evaluation of [4247],at the level of3.1, 3.7 and 3.8 σ respectively for Refs.
[4246], [4208], [4244].
If one assumes that the tension is due to an er-roneous cross section measurement in a certain inter-val of√s, it is important to clarify which interval andwhich hadronic channel it might be. In this regard, wenote that the window observable receives a contribu-tion of about 55% from the √s interval between 0.613.5 QCD and (g− 2) of the muon 491 228 230 232 234 236 238 240 242 244window observable [ 10-10 ]RBC/UKQCD ’18BMW ’20Mainz-CLS ’22ETMC ’22Dispersive ’22Fig. 13.5.5The partial contribution toaHVP,LOµ called ‘win-dow observable’, as computed by four lattice collaborations[4208, 4237, 4244, 4246], compared to its dispersive determi-nation [4247]. Further recent lattice results, particularly forthe (dominant) ‘light-quark connected contribution’, can befound in [4248–4250] as well as in the update [4245] of theRBC/UKQCD ’18 result.
and 0.9GeV, while about 40% come from higher center-of-mass energies [4244]. Its relative sensitivity to the(ρ,ω)-meson region is thus similar to the fullaHVP,LOµ .
If one therefore assumes the2π channel to be responsi-ble for the tension, this would require shifts of the2πcross section which exceed by far the claimed system-atic errors of the experiments as well as the observeddiscrepancies between the various experiments.
On the other hand, one might ask what could gowronginthelatticecalculationsofthewindowquantity.
Perhaps the most critical common source of systematicerror among lattice calculations is the one associatedwith taking the continuum limit. After all, the rangesof lattice spacing used by the different collaborations aswell as their fit ansätze in the lattice spacing are fairlysimilar. Thus, new cross-section measurements as wellas additional lattice calculations of the fullaHVP,LOµ willgiveimportantindicationsastotheoriginofthecurrenttension.
In case of an eventual consolidation of the isospinbreaking corrections, e.g. by means of auxiliary latticeQCD calculations [4251], the use of hadronicτ decaysin the HVP dispersion integral might be reconsideredfor the future. New and high–statistics measurementsof spectral functions of hadronicτ decays are indeedexpected from BELLE-II in the upcoming years. It isgoing to be exciting to see whether such aτ-based dis-persive analysis of HVP will be in agreement with thecurrent e+e−-based methodology.
13.5.2 Hadronic light-by-light scattering in themuon ( g-2)The HLbL contributionaHLbLµ is of orderα3, and thusof one order higher thanaHVP,LOµ in the expansion ofaµ in the fine-structure constant. The absolute preci-sion target is to reach a level under1 ×10−10, whichgiventhecontribution’sapproximatesize, aHLbLµ ≃10×10−10, amounts to a result with a precision under 10%.
While this requirement is much less stringent than foraHVP,LOµ , the physics and kinematics involved inaHLbLµare also much more complex. We first review the modeland dispersive calculations before describing the statusof the lattice QCD approach.
Data-driven determinationThe hadronic blob on the right-hand side diagram ofFig. 13.5.1 can be decomposed into subgraphs with in-termediate pseudoscalar meson exchanges (π0,η, η′) aswell as exchanges of heavier scalar, axial-vector, or ten-sor mesons. Furthermore, intermediate pion, kaon, andeven quark loop exchanges need to be considered. Inthe past, many of these individual contributions wereestimated using hadronic models [4204, 4252–4255], forwhich an estimate of the model uncertainty is notori-ously difficult and for which possible double countingissues have been discussed as an additional source ofuncertainty. A consensus exists among all the variousestimates that the exchange of pseudoscalar mesons,particularly the π0, is the dominant contribution toHLbL. For years, the so called Glasgow consensus value[4256] ofaHLbLµ = (10.5±2.6)·10−10 was considered as abenchmark estimate and was found to be in good agree-mentwithotherestimates(seee.g.[ 4257]),althoughtheindividual subgraphs were partly in conflict with eachother.
Developingapredictivedispersiverepresentationforthe LbL scattering amplitude with three spacelike pho-tons represents a much more complex theoretical taskthan in the case of the HVP (see Eq.13.5.2). The re-cent developments of dispersion relations for the pseu-doscalar and the pion-loop subgraphs within the Refs.
[4258, 4259] can therefore be considered as a majorbreakthrough in the analytical treatment of HLbL (seealso Ref. [4260] for an alternative representation). In-deed, for the first time an unambiguous definition ofindividual contributions became possible together withan exact relation to experimental data to be used asinput, namely a relation to meson transition form fac-tors (TFFs), which encode the coupling of two virtualphotons to mesons. Besides the TFFs, which dependon the two photon virtualities, also meson decays, cer-tain e+e− annihilation reactions and Primakoff mea-492 13 WEAK DECAYS AND QUARK MIXINGsurements have been found to be highly relevant. Aspointed out in Ref. [4261], the most relevant photonvirtualities foraHLbLµ are on the GeV scale and below,an observation that calls for a dedicated campaign ofexperimental measurements in this energy range. TheBESIIIcollaborationhasrecentlypresentedanewhigh-quality measurement [4262] of the singly-virtual TFF ofthe π0, which is shown in Fig.13.5.6, where it is com-pared with older data [4263, 4264] as well as a calcu-lation of this form factor in lattice QCD [4265], a phe-nomenological estimate based on Canterbury approx-imants [4266], and with a dispersive treatment of theTFF [4267]. The agreement between data and theory isvery good. Unfortunately, at low energies experimentshave not been able yet to provide data with two pho-ton virtualities, as needed for the new dispersive treat-ment of the pseudoscalar and pion loop contributions.
Dispersive evaluations of the TFFs [4268] and latticeQCD calculations [4265] have been used instead. Thegood agreement shown in Fig. 13.5.6 and the overallconsistency found elsewhere indicate the robustness ofthe theoretical descriptions of the TFFs. For the fu-ture, the first double-virtual TFF measurements areexpected from BELLE-II and BESIII.
Currently, in the Theory White Paper, the new dis-persive treatments have led to a major reduction of theuncertainties of the pseudoscalar exchanges and pionand kaon loop subgraphs. For the remaining scalar, ax-ial vector, and tensor exchange graphs as well as theshort-distance contributions, a conservative error esti-mate has been applied and future research in experi-ment and theory will eventually lead to a further re-duction of the uncertainty of those contributions. Thedispersive result arrived at in Ref. [4206] amounts toaHLbLµ = (9 .2 ±1.9) ·10−10 [4195, 4265–4267, 4269–4277] and is found to be in good agreement with theGlasgow consensus value with a slightly reduced un-certainty, but with a significant reduction of the modeldependence compared to this older value.
Lattice QCD calculationThe first proposal for computing the hadronic light-by-light contribution in lattice QCD dates back to 2005[4278]. The subject lay dormant for some years un-til 2013 [4279], the new effort leading to first resultsfor the quark-connected contribution at a pion mass of330MeV/c2 [4280]. Important technical improvementsto the original methods were made in [4281]. The lead-ing disconnected contribution was calculated for thefirst time in [4282], along with the connected part, atthe physical pion mass. Finally, this multi-year effortculminated into a full calculation [4283] in the(u,d,s )quark sector. This result, displayed in Fig. 13.5.7 asFig. 13.5.6 The single-virtual pion form factorFπ0γ∗γ∗(−Q2,0) as a function of Q2 measured by theCELLO [4264], CLEO [4263], and BESIII [4262] experimentsas well as phenomenological predictions using a dispersiveanalysis [4267] and Canterbury approximants [4266]; shownis furthermore an ab-initio calculation within Lattice QCD[4265].
RBC/UKQCD’18,contributedtotheWhitePaper2020theory average, together with the dispersive estimatequoted above.
The treatment of massless internal photons is animportant technical issue in lattice QCD. In the pub-lications cited in the previous paragraph, the photonswere treated on the same lattice as the QCD degrees offreedom.In[ 4284–4286],aposition-spacemethodallow-ing for the photons to be treated in infinite volume wasproposed and worked out. Meanwhile, similar methodswere also developed by members of the RBC/UKQCDcollaboration[ 4287].Altogether,thedevelopmentofop-timized position-space methods led to the calculationsof[4288–4290]bytheMainz-CLSgroup.Theresult,dis-played in Fig.13.5.7, has an uncertainty very similar tothe dispersive result.
Discussion HLbLFig.13.5.7 illustrates the good consistency among thedata-driven, lattice and earlier hadronic model determi-nations. This is a good sign, since the dominant sourcesof uncertainty are very different in the different deter-minations: for instance, the RBC/UKQCD calculationinvolves a fairly long extrapolation to infinite volume,while the Mainz-CLS determination results from an ex-trapolation over a sizeable interval of pion masses. Up-dates of the lattice calculations are planned in the nearfuture.
In the dispersive data-driven approach, further pro-gress can be achieved by improved TFF measurementsand calculations for theη and η′ mesons. Most impor-tant, however, is a future experimental program of mea-13.5 QCD and (g− 2) of the muon 493 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22aHLbL [ 10-10 ]Mainz-CLS ’20-’22RBC/UKQCD ’19(with charm 0.28(5))WP ’20J ’17PdRV ’09JN ’09µ νFig. 13.5.7 Overview of results obtained for the hadroniclight-by-light contribution to the muon (g − 2): the Mainz-CLS [4289, 4290] and RBC/UKQCD lattice results [ 4283],the Theory White Paper 2020 average [ 4206], and previ-ous model estimates by Jegerlehner [4195], Prades–de Rafael–Vainshtein [4256] (the ‘Glasgow consensus’) and Jegerlehner–Nyffeler[4204,4291].WehavesupplementedtheRBC/UKQCDresultwiththecharmcontributioncomputedin[ 4290].TheWPaverage is based on the dispersive [4195, 4265–4267, 4269–4277]and the RBC/UKQCD [4283] lattice result.
surements of the two-photon couplings of mesons inthe (1-2) GeV/c2 range, where especially axial vectormesons play an important role and for which the cur-rent data base is limited. New results are expected inthe future by the BESIII collaboration in a range of mo-mentumtransfersimilartotheoneshowninFig. 13.5.6.
Moreover, also BABAR and BELLE-II will be able toprovidenewmeasurementsatahighermomentumtrans-fer. New TFF data will also be crucial for a matchingof individual hadronic channels to the short-distancebehaviour of HLbL.
Given the ongoing program of various groups in ex-periment, hadron phenomenology and lattice QCD, weexpect an improvement of the HLbL error from cur-rently 20% to 10% or lower. An agreement between anab-initio lattice QCD calculation with a data-driven es-timate on such a level will represent a non-trivial cross-check between two completely independent methods.
13.5.3 Conclusions and OutlookMany theoretical and experimental developments havetakenplaceinthepastfiveyearsontheanomalousmag-netic moment of the muonaµ. The direct measurementof aµ [4203] has been confirmed and improved [4207],whilethe (g−2)TheoryInitiativehashelpedcoordinatemany activities to improve the Standard Model predic-tion foraµ [4206]. Hadronic effects limit the precision ofthis prediction, especially the hadronic vacuum polar-ization (HVP) and the hadronic light-by-light (HLbL)contributions reviewed above.
In the immediate future, the top priority is to clarifythe tensions that have emerged in partial and full HVPdeterminations. Additional lattice QCD calculations ofthe full aHVP,LOµ contribution are eagerly awaited, inconjunction with a strategy to identify the origin ofthe existing strong tension with the dispersive approachfor the ‘intermediate window’ subcontribution. On thedata-drivenside,theaccuracyofthedispersiveapproachfor obtainingaHVP,LOµ is currently hampered by incon-sistencies in the experimental data bases. The mostproblematicissuesarisefromthetensioninthedetermi-nation of thee+e− →π+π− cross section (KLOE/BA-BAR puzzle), but also in other exclusive channels, e.g.
in the process e+e− → K+K−, inconsistencies havebeen observed. The clarification of these issues is one ofthe most important challenges for an improved determi-nation of the SM prediction of(g−2)µ and will be ad-dressed by several existing and upcominge+e− experi-ments in future. In that respect, since the cross sectionmeasurementsheavilyrelyonhigh-precisionMonte-Carlogenerators [4292], it is of utmost importance to main-tain and to refine the PHOKHARA [4293–4310] gener-ator as well as other Monte Carlo programs [4311–4316]for future applications.
As an alternative to the program of hadronic crosssectionmeasurementsat e+e− colliders,ithasbeenpro-posed [4317] to carry out a spacelike measurement ofthe effective electromagnetic coupling via a scatteringexperiment providing thereby input to a dispersion in-tegral for HVP. The MUonE collaboration is currentlypreparing the design of a detector [4318] at the muonbeam of SPS/CERN towards the final approval of theproject. Provided that the differential cross section oftheµescatteringprocesscanbemeasuredtothedesiredaccuracy, this will allow for an entirely new determina-tion of HVP.
Insummary,controllinghadroniceffectsinthemuon(g −2) to match the absolute experimental precisionrepresentsamajorchallenge.Overcomingthischallengewill demonstrate that strong-interaction contributionsto precision observables can be controlled with the re-quired level of accuracy and consistency between data-driven and lattice QCD approaches. This ability willbe crucial to maximize the science output of a futurelepton collider.