5PrefaceQuantum Chromodynamics or QCD was developed anddefinedoverabriefperiodfrom1972-73.Oneofus(EK)wrote an article early in 2021 on the scalar glueball andsearched the literatureto find where glueballswerefirstmentioned. This was at the 16th International Confer-enceonHigh-EnergyPhysics(ICHEP72).Inthewinterof 2021/2022 he thought it was time to prepare a vol-ume dedicated to 50 Years of QCD. He got approvalfrom the EJPC, and asked FG to join the effort. Hereis the result.
It’s been quite an adventure to guide and preparethis volume. From the start it was to be published asa single article, organized and edited by the two coed-itors, with integrated contributions from invited scien-tists familiar with all aspects of the subject. Our ini-tial outline included only eight sections, but as we gotadvice from our conveners and early contributors, thenumber of sections grew to the 14 you see here, andin some cases the number of subsections in each sec-tion also grew. The subject is both beautiful and vast,and keeping this volume “limited” in length was a realchallenge.
Our goal was to prepare a volume for young Ph.Dsand postdocs that could serve as a readable resourceand introduction to specialties outside of their own fieldof research – a shortcut to acquiring the broad familiar-ity that usually takes time to acquire. We also invitedour contributors to reflect on how they developed theirideas/insights, usually discouraged in scientific articles.
We believe that what has resulted is truly unique.
The volume begins with the personal reflections oftwo scientists who were contributors to the foundationsof QCD (Sec. 1), and follows with three early develop-ments that quickly showed that QCD as on the righttrack(Sec.2).Prominentamongthesewasthe“Novem-ber revolution,” where the discovery and explanation ofthe states of charmonium lead quickly to the Cornellpotential and an early description of why quarks couldnot be seen, convincing may doubters that quarks werereal.
After establishing that the QCD fine structure con-stant, αs, is too large at hadronic scales for pertur-bation theory to work (Sec. 3), we describe in somedetail Lattice QCD (Sec. 4), believed now to be theonly method that can giveexact predictions for QCD(with numerical errors, of course, which are decreasingrapidly as the computations and computers improve).
Unfortunately, Lattice QCD does not give much of anintuitive picture of how the physics works, so approx-imate analytic methods are needed (and will probablyalways be needed) and these are summarized in Secs. 5and 6, including effective field theories, a powerful toolwith many applications. Perhaps some day we will haveexact analytic solutions, but not today.
From there our account turns to experimental man-ifestations of QCD (with theoretical support), start-ing with the exploration of the QCD phase diagramin heavy ion collisions and in dense matter (Sec. 7),followed by the study of mesons (Sec. 8) and baryons(Sec. 9) that reveal the existence of “exotic” states likeglueballs, hybrids, hadronic molecules, and tetra- andpentaquarks.Aspecialfocusis giventothenucleonandits structure (Sec. 10). Then, collisions at high energiesare discussed, from the hard scattering of two partonsfollowed by their hadronization (Sec. 11); the produc-tion and identification of jets of particles culminatedin the discovery of the Higgs boson and measurementsof its properties (Sec. 12); weak decays, precision anal-yses of the quark mixing matrix, and the anomalousmagnetic moment of muons that show the first hintsof New Physics beyond the Standard Model (Sec. 13).
The volume concludes with a brief account of experi-mental projects under construction or already funded(Sec. 14). We do not discuss the many exciting theo-retical or experimental ideas that are currently in thedrawing board, or as theorists sometimes say, on the“second sheet” (when they are joking about wonderfulideas still in an imaginative state). These we save forthe next volume!It has been a great experience for us to work onthis volume; we hope you will find some pleasure inskimming through it.
1 Theoretical FoundationsConveners:F ranz Gross and Eberhard KlemptThis section contains two personal accounts of the earlydevelopment or “discovery” of QCD.
Leutwyler’s contribution starts with a broad pictureof the chaotic state of “theories” of the strong interac-tions in the 1960’s and carries us through to the presentday. He describes how many thought field theory couldnot work for the description of “nuclear forces.” Theythought the use of dispersion relations and unitaritywould provide a better approach, but now we know thatthese are only useful tools. His discussion of how theexact and approximate symmetries of QCD lead to anunderstanding of the mass scales of the quarks showshow much the development of QCD and the standardmodel have brought order out of chaos, and have led toa deep understanding of the physics.6 1 THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONSThe second contribution by Fritzsch gives a morefocused and personal account of how some issues thathadtobesurmountedbeforeQCDbecametheacceptedtheory of the strong forces. He describes several argu-ments that them to the necessity for three colors ofquarks (and the SU(3) color symmetry). He reminds usthat QCD and the existence of quarks did not becomewidely accepted until the discovery of the J/ψ, amongthe topics discussed in the following Sec.2.
Bothoftheseaccountsofthehistoryandthephysicsare exciting to read, and a broad introduction to thisvolume. We hope you will enjoy them as much as wehave.
1.1 The strong interactions 1Heinrich Leutwyler1.1.1 BeginningsThe discovery of the neutron in 1932 [2] may be viewedas the birth of the strong interaction: it indicated thatthe nuclei consist of protons and neutrons and hencethe presence of a force that holds them together, strongenoughtocounteracttheelectromagneticrepulsion.Im-mediately thereafter, Heisenberg introduced the notionof isospin as a symmetry of the strong interaction, inorder to explain why proton and neutron nearly havethe same mass [3]. In 1935, Yukawa pointed out thatthe nuclear force could be generated by the exchangeof a hypothetical spinless particle, provided its mass isintermediate between the masses of proton and electron– ameson [4]. Today, we know that such a particle in-deed exists: Yukawa predicted the pion. Stueckelbergpursued similar ideas, but was mainly thinking aboutparticles of spin 1, in analogy with the particle thatmediates the electromagnetic interaction [5].
In the thirties and fourties of the last century, theunderstanding of the force between two nucleons madeconsiderable progress, in the framework of nonrelativis-tic potential models. These are much more flexible thanquantum field theories. Suitable potentials that are at-tractive at large distances but repulsive at short dis-tances do yield a decent understanding of nuclear struc-ture: Paris potential, Bonn potential, shell model of thenucleus. In this framework, nuclear reactions, in partic-ular the processes responsible for the luminosity of thesun, stellar structure,α-decay and related matters werewell understood more than sixty years ago.
These phenomena concern interactions among nu-cleons with small relative velocities. Experimentally, it1 The present section is an extended version of my lecturenotes On the history of the strong interaction [1]had become possible to explore relativistic collisions,but a description in terms of nonrelativistic potentialscannot cover these. In the period between 1935 and1965, many attempts at formulating a theory of thestronginteractionbasedonelementaryfieldsforbaryonsand mesons were made. In particular, uncountable PhDtheses were written, based on local interactions of theYukawatype,usingperturbationtheorytoanalyzethem.
The coupling constants invariably turned out to be nu-merically large, indicating that the neglect of the higherorder contributions was not justified. Absolutely noth-ing worked even half way.
Although there was considerable progress in under-standing the general principles of quantum field the-ory (Lorentz invariance, unitarity, crossing symmetry,causality, analyticity, dispersion relations, CPT theo-rem, spin and statistics) as well as in renormalizationtheory, faith in quantum field theory was in decline,even concerning QED (Landau pole). To many, therenormalization procedure – needed to arrive at physi-cally meaningful results – looked suspicious, and it ap-peared doubtful that the strong interaction could at allbe described by means of a local quantum field theory.
Some suggested that this framework should be replacedby S-matrix theory – heated debates concerning thissuggestion took place at the time [6]. Regge poles wereconsidered as a promising alternative to the quantumfields (the Veneziano model is born in 1968 [7]). Sixtyyears ago, when I completed my studies, the quantumfield theory of the strong interaction consisted of a col-lection of beliefs, prejudices and assumptions. Quite afew of these turned out to be wrong.
1.1.2 Flavor symmetriesSymmetries that extend isospin to a larger Lie groupprovided the first hints towards an understanding of thestructure underneath the strong interaction phenom-ena. The introduction of the strangeness quantum num-ber and the Gell-Mann-Nishijima formula [8, 9] was asignificantstepinthisdirection.GoldbergerandTreiman[10] then showed that theaxial vector current plays animportant role, not only in the weak interaction (thepion-to-vacuum matrix element of this current – thepion decay constant Fπ – determines the rate of theweak decay π → µν) but also in the context of thestrong interaction: the nucleon matrix element of theaxial vector current,gA, determines the strength of theinteraction between pions and nucleons:gπN = gAMN/Fπ.
Atlowenergies,themaincharacteristicofthestronginteraction is that the energy gap is small: the light-est state occurring in the eigenvalue spectrum of the1.1 The strong interactions 7Hamiltonian is the pion, with2 Mπ ≃135 MeV, smallcompared to the mass of the proton,Mp ≃938 MeV.
In 1960, Nambu found out why that is so: it has to dowith a hidden, approximate, continuous symmetry [11].
Since some of its generators carry negative parity, it isreferred to as achiral symmetry . For this symmetry tobe consistent with observation, it is essential that ananalog of spontaneous magnetization occurs in parti-cle physics: for dynamical reasons, the state of lowestenergy – the vacuum – is not symmetric under chiraltransformations. Consequently, the symmetry cannotbe seen in the spectrum of the theory: it ishidden orspontaneously broken . Nambu realized that the spon-taneous breakdown of a continuous symmetry entailsmassless particles analogous to the spin waves of a mag-net and concluded that the pions must play this role. Ifthestronginteractionwasstrictlyinvariantunderchiralsymmetry, there would be no energy gap at all – the pi-ons would be massless.3 Conversely, since the pions arenot massless, chiral symmetry cannot be exact – unlikeisospin, which at that time was taken to be an exactsymmetry of the strong interaction. The spectrum doeshave an energy gap because chiral symmetry is not ex-act: the pions are not massless, only light. In fact, theyrepresent the lightest strongly interacting particles thatcan be exchanged between two nucleons. This is why,at large distances, the potential between two nucleonsis correctly described by the Yukawa formula.
The discovery of theEightfold Way by Gell-Mannand Ne’eman paved the way to an understanding ofthe mass pattern of the baryons and mesons [13, 14].
Like chiral symmetry, the group SU(3) that underliesthe Eightfold Way represents an approximate symme-try: the spectrum of the mesons and baryons does notconsist of degenerate multiplets of this group. The split-ting between the energy levels, however, does exhibit apattern that can be understood in terms of the assump-tion that the part of the Hamiltonian that breaks thesymmetry transforms in a simple way. This led to theGell-Mann-Okubo formula [14, 15] and to a predictionfor the mass of theΩ−, a member of the baryon de-cuplet which was still missing, but was soon confirmedexperimentally, at the predicted place [16].
1.1.3 Quark ModelIn 1964, Gell-Mann [17] and Zweig [18] pointed out thatthe observed pattern of baryons can qualitatively beunderstood on the basis of the assumption that theseparticles are bound states built with three constituents,2 I am using natural units whereℏ = c= 1 .
3 A precise formulation of this statement, known as theGold-stone theorem, was given later [12].
while the spectrum of the mesons indicates that theycontain only two of these. Zweig called the constituents“aces”. Gell-Mann coined the term “quarks”, which isnow commonly accepted. The Quark Model graduallyevolvedintoaverysimpleandsuccessfulsemi-quantitativeframework, but gave rise to a fundamental puzzle: whydo the constituents not show up in experiment? Forthis reason, the existence of the quarks was considereddoubtful: “Such particles [quarks] presumably are notreal but we may use them in our field theory anyway …”[19]. Quarks were treated like the veal used to preparea pheasant in the royal french cuisine: the pheasant wasbaked between two slices of veal, which were then dis-carded (or left for the less royal members of the court).
Conceptually, this was a shaky cuisine.
If the flavor symmetries are important, why are theynot exact? Gell-Mann found a beautiful explanation:current algebra [14,19]. The charges form an exact alge-bra even if they do not commute with the Hamiltonianand the framework can be extended to the correspond-ing currents, irrespective of whether or not they areconserved. Adler and Weisberger showed that currentalgebra can be tested with the sum rule that followsfrom the nucleon matrix element of the commutator oftwo axial vector charges [20,21]. Weinberg then demon-strated that even the strength of the interaction amongthe pions can be understood on the basis of currentalgebra: the ππ scattering lengths can be predicted interms of the pion decay constant [22].
1.1.4 Behavior at short distancesBjorken had pointed out that if the nucleons containpoint-like constituents, then theepcross section shouldobey scaling laws in the deep inelastic region [23]. In-deed, the scattering experiments carried out by theMIT-SLAC collaboration in 1968/69 did show exper-imental evidence for such constituents [24]. Feynmancalled thesepartons, leaving it open whether they werethe quarks or something else.
The operator product expansion turned out to be avery useful tool for the short distance analysis of thetheory – the title of the paper where it was introduced[25], “Nonlagrangian models of current algebra,” re-flects the general skepticism towards Lagrangian quan-tum field theory that I mentioned in Section1.1.1.
1.1.5 ColorThe Quark Model was difficult to reconcile with thespin-statistics theorem which implies that particles ofspin 12 must obey Fermi statistics. Greenberg proposed8 1 THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONSthat the quarks obey neither Fermi-statistics nor Bose-statistics, but “para-statistics of order three” [26]. Theproposal amounts to the introduction of a new internalquantumnumber.Indeed,Bogolyubov,StruminskyandTavkhelidze [27], Han and Nambu [28] and Miyamoto[29] independently pointed out that some of the prob-lems encountered in the quark model disappear if theu, d and s quarks occur in 3 states. Gell-Mann coinedthe term “color” for the new quantum number.
One of the possibilities considered for the interac-tion that binds the quarks together was an abeliangauge field analogous to the e.m. field, but this gave riseto problems, because the field would then interfere withthe other degrees of freedom. Fritzsch and Gell-Mannpointed out that if the gluons carry color, then the em-pirical observation that quarks appear to be confinedmight also apply to them: the spectrum of the theorymight exclusively contain color neutral states [30].
In his lectures at the Schladming Winter School in1972 [31], Gell-Mann thoroughly discussed the role ofthe quarks and gluons: theorists had to navigate be-tween Scylla and Charybdis, trying to abstract neithertoo much nor too little from models built with theseobjects. The basic tool at that time wascurrent alge-bra on the light cone . He invited me to visit Caltech.
I did that during three months in the spring break of1973 and spent an extremely interesting period there.
The personal recollections of Harald Fritzsch (see Sec-tion 1.2) describe the developments that finally led toQuantum Chromodynamics.
As it was known already that the electromagneticand weak interactions are mediated by gauge fields, theidea that color might be a local symmetry as well doesnotappearasfarfetched.Themainproblematthetimewasthatforagaugefieldtheorytodescribethehadronsand their interaction, it had to be fundamentally dif-ferent from the quantum field theories encountered innature so far: all of these, including the electroweaktheory, have the spectrum indicated by the degrees offreedom occurring in the Lagrangian: photons, leptons,intermediate bosons, … The proposal can only makesense if this need not be so, that is if the spectrumof physical states in a quantum field theory can differfrom the spectrum of the fields needed to formulate it:gluons and quarks in the Lagrangian, hadrons in thespectrum. This looked like wishful thinking. How comethat color is confined while electric charge is free?1.1.6 Electromagnetic interactionThe final form of the laws obeyed by the electromag-netic field was found by Maxwell, around 1860 – theselawssurvivedrelativityandquantumtheory,unharmed.
FockpointedoutthattheSchrödingerequationforelec-trons in an electromagnetic field,1i∂ψ∂t − 12m2e(⃗∇+ ie ⃗A)2ψ−eϕψ = 0 , (1.1.1)is invariant under a group of local transformations:⃗A′(x) = ⃗A(x) + ⃗∇α(x), ϕ ′(x) = ϕ(x) −∂α(x)∂tψ(x)′ = e−ieα(x) ψ(x) , (1.1.2)in the sense that the fields⃗A′,ϕ′,ψ′ describe the samephysical situation as ⃗A,ϕ,ψ [32]. Weyl termed thesegauge transformations (with gauge group U(1) in thiscase). In fact, the electromagnetic interaction is fullycharacterized by symmetry with respect to this group:gauge invariance is the crucial property of this interac-tion.
I illustrate the statement with the core of QuantumElectrodynamics: photons and electrons. Gauge invari-ance allows only two free parameters in the Lagrangianof this system:e,me. Moreover, only one of these is di-mensionless:e2/4π= 1/137.035 999 084 (21). U(1) sym-metry and renormalizability fully determine the prop-erties of the e.m. interaction, except for this number,which so far still remains unexplained.
1.1.7 Nonabelian gauge fieldsKaluza [33] and Klein [34] had shown that a 5-dimen-sional Riemann space with a metric that is independentof the fifth coordinate is equivalent to a 4-dimensionalworld with gravity, a gauge field and a scalar field .
In this framework, gauge transformations amount to ashift in the fifth direction:x5′= x5 +α(⃗ x,t). In geomet-ric terms, a metric space of this type is characterized bya group of isometries: the geometry remains the samealong certain directions, indicated by Killing vectors.
In the case of the 5-dimensional spaces considered byKaluza and Klein, the isometry group is the abeliangroup U(1). The fifth dimension can be compactified toa circle – U(1) then generates motions on this circle.
A particularly attractive feature of this theory is thatit can explain the quantization of the electric charge:fields living on such a manifold necessarily carry inte-ger multiples of a basic charge unit.
Pauli noticed that the Kaluza-Klein scenario admitsa natural generalization to higher dimensions, wherelarger isometry groups find place. Riemann spaces ofdimension >5 admit nonabelian isometry groups thatreduce the system to a 4-dimensional one withgravity,nonabelian gauge fields and severalscalar fields . Pauliwas motivated by the isospin symmetry of the meson-nucleoninteractionandfocusedattentiononaRiemannspace of dimension 6, with isometry group SU(2).1.1 The strong interactions 9Pauli did not publish the idea that the strong inter-actionmightariseinthisway,becausehewasconvincedthat the quanta of a gauge field are massless: gauge in-variance does not allow one to put a mass term into theLagrangian. He concluded that the forces mediated bygauge fields are necessarily of long range and can there-fore not mediate the strong interaction, which is knownto be of short range. More details concerning Pauli’sthoughts can be found in [35]. The paper of Yang andMills appeared in 1954 [36]. Ronald Shaw, a studentof Salam, independently formulated nonabelian gaugefieldtheoryinhisPhDthesis[ 37].Tenyearslater,Higgs[38], Brout and Englert [39] and Guralnik, Hagen andKibble [40] showed that Pauli’s objection is not valid ingeneral: in the presence of scalar fields, gauge fields canpick up mass, so that forces mediated by gauge fieldscan be of short range. The work of Glashow [41], Wein-berg [42] and Salam [43] then demonstrated that non-abelian gauge fields are relevant for physics: the frame-work discovered by Higgs et al. does accommodate arealistic description of the e.m.and weak interactions.
1.1.8 Asymptotic freedomAlready in 1965, Vanyashin and Terentyev [44] foundthat the renormalization of the electric charge of a vec-tor field is of opposite sign to the one of the electron.
In the language of SU(2) gauge field theory, their resultimplies that theβ-function is negative at one loop.
The first correct calculation of theβ-function of anonabelian gauge field theory was carried out by Khrip-lovich,forthecaseofSU(2),relevantfortheelectroweakinteraction [45]. He found thatβ is negative and con-cluded that the interaction becomes weak at short dis-tance.InhisPhDthesis,’tHooftperformedthecalcula-tion of theβ-function for an arbitrary gauge group, in-cluding the interaction with fermions and Higgs scalars[46, 47]. He demonstrated that the theory is renormal-izable and confirmed that, unless there are too manyfermions or scalars, theβ-function is negative at smallcoupling.
In 1973, Gross and Wilczek [48] and Politzer [49]discussed the consequences of a negativeβ-function andsuggestedthatthismightexplainBjorkenscaling,whichhad been observed at SLAC in 1969. They pointed outthat QCD predicts specific modifications of the scal-ing laws. In the meantime, there is strong experimentalevidence for these.
1.1.9 Arguments in favor of QCDThe reasons for proposing QCD as a theory of thestrong interaction are discussed in [50]. The idea thatthe observed spectrum of particles can fully be under-stood on the basis of a theory built with quarks andgluons still looked rather questionable and was accord-ingly formulated in cautious terms. In the abstract, forinstance, we pointed out that ”…there are several ad-vantages in abstracting properties of hadrons and theircurrents from a Yang-Mills gauge model based on col-ored quarks and color octet gluons.” Before the pa-per was completed, the papers by Gross, Wilczek andPolitzer quoted above circulated as preprints - they arequoted and asymptotic freedom is given as argument#4 in favor of QCD. Also, important open questionswere pointed out, in particular, the U(1) problem.
Many considered QCD a wild speculation. On theother hand, several papers concerning gauge field theo-riesthatincludethestronginteractionappearedaroundthe same time, for instance [51, 52].
1.1.10 November revolutionThe discovery of the J/ψ was announced simultane-ously at Brookhaven and SLAC, on November 11, 1974.
Three days later, the observation was confirmed at AD-ONE, Frascati and ten days later, theψ′ was found atSLAC, where subsequently many further related stateswere discovered. We now know that these are boundstatesformedwiththe c-quarkanditsantiparticlewhichis comparatively heavy and that there are two further,even heavier quarks:b and t.
At sufficiently high energies, quarks and gluons domanifest themselves as jets. Like the neutrini, they haveleft their theoretical place of birth and can now be seenflying around like ordinary, observable particles. Grad-ually, particle physicists abandoned their outposts in noman’s and no woman’s land, returned to the quantumfields and resumed discussion in the good oldGasthauszu Lagrange , a term coined by Jost. The theoreticalframework that describes the strong, electromagneticand weak interactions in terms of gauge fields, leptons,quarks and scalar fields is now referred to as the Stan-dard Model - this framework clarified the picture enor-mously.44 Indeed, the success of this theory is amazing: Gauge fieldsare renormalizable in four dimensions, but it looks unlikely thatthe Standard Model is valid much beyond the explored energyrange. Presumably it represents an effective theory. There is noreason, however, for an effective theory to be renormalizable.
One of the most puzzling aspects of the Standard Model is thatit is able to account for such a broad range of phenomena thatare characterized by very different scales within one and thesame renormalizable theory.10 1 THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS1.1.11 Quantum chromodynamicsIf the electroweak gauge fields as well as the leptons andthe scalars are dropped, the Lagrangian of the StandardModel reduces to QCD:LQCD = −14 FAµνFAµν + i¯qγµ(∂µ + igs12 λAAAµ)q−¯qRMqL −¯qL M†qR −θω. (1.1.3)The gluons are described by the gauge fieldAAµ, whichbelongs to the color groupSUc(3) and gs is the corre-sponding coupling constant. The field strength tensorFAµν is defined byFAµν = ∂µAAν −∂νAAµ −gsfABCABAC , (1.1.4)where the symbolfABC denotes the structure constantsof SU(3). The quarks transform according to the funda-mental representation ofSUc(3). The compact notationused in (1.1.3) suppresses the labels for flavor, colourand spin: the various quark flavors are represented byDirac fields,q = {u, d, s, c, b, t}and qR = 12 (1 + γ5)q,qL = 12 (1−γ5)qare their right- and left-handed compo-nents. The field u(x), for instance, contains 3×4 com-ponents. While the 3×3 Gell-Mann matricesλA act onthe color label and satisfy the commutation relation[λA,λB] = 2 ifABCλC , (1.1.5)the Dirac matricesγµ operate on the spin index. Themass matrixM, on the other hand, acts in flavor space.
Its form depends on the choice of the quark field basis.
If the right- and left-handed fields are subject to in-dependent rotations, qR →VR qR, qL →VL qL , whereVR,VL ∈ SU(Nf) represent Nf ×Nf matrices act-ing on the quark flavour, the quark mass matrix is re-placed byM→ V†R MVL. This freedom can be used tonot only diagonalizeM, but to ensure that the eigen-values are real, nonnegative and ordered according to0 ≤mu ≤md ≤... ≤mt.
The constant θ is referred to as the vacuum angleand ω stands for the winding number densityω= g2s32π2 FAµν ˜FAµν , (1.1.6)where ˜FAµν = 12 ϵµνρσFAρσ isthedualofthefieldstrength.
As it is the case with electrodynamics, gauge in-variance fully determines the form of the chromody-namic interaction. The main difference between QEDand QCD arises from the fact that the correspondinggauge groups, U(1) and SU(3), are different. While thestructure constants of U(1) vanish because this is anabelian group, those ofSUc(3) are different from zero.
For this reason, gauge invariance implies that the La-grangian contains terms involving three or four gluonfields: in contrast to the photons, which interact amongthemselves only via the exchange of charged particles,the gluons would interact even if quarks did not exist.
Theterminvolving ωcanberepresentedasaderiva-tive, ω = ∂µfµ. Since only the integral over the La-grangian counts, this term represents a contributionthat only depends on the behavior of the gauge fieldat the boundary of space-time. In the case of QED,where renormalizability allows the presence of an anal-ogous term, quantities of physical interest are indeedunaffected by such a contribution, but for QCD, thisis not the case. Even at the classical level, nonabeliangauge fields can form instantons, which minimize theEuclidean action for a given nonzero winding numberν =∫d4xω.
1.1.12 Theoretical paradiseInordertobrieflydiscusssomeofthebasicpropertiesofQCD, let me turn off the electroweak interaction, treatthe three light quarks as massless and the remainingones as infinitely heavy:mu = md = ms = 0 , m c = mb = mt = ∞. (1.1.7)The Lagrangian then contains a single parameter: thecoupling constantgs, which may be viewed as the netcolor of a quark. Unlike an electron, a quark cannot beisolated from the rest of the world – its colorgs dependson the radius of the region considered. According toperturbation theory, the color contained in a sphere ofradius r grows logarithmically with the radius5:αs ≡g2s4π = 2π9 |ln(rΛ)|. (1.1.8)AlthoughtheclassicalLagrangianofmasslessQCDdoesnotcontainanydimensionfulparameter,thecorrespond-ing quantum field theory does: the strength of the in-teraction cannot be characterized by a number, but bya dimensionful quantity, the intrinsic scaleΛ.
Thephenomenonisreferredtoas dimensional trans-mutation. In perturbation theory, it manifests itselfthrough the occurrence of divergences – contrary towhat many quantum field theorists thought for manyyears, the divergences do not represent a disease, butare intimately connected with the structure of the the-ory. They are a consequence of the fact that a quan-tum field theory does not inherit all of the propertiesof the corresponding classical field theory. In the caseof massless Chromodynamics, the classical Lagrangiandoes not contain any dimensionful constants and hence5 The formula only holds if the radius is small,rΛ ≪ 1.1.1 The strong interactions 11remains invariant under a change of scale. This prop-erty, which is referred to as conformal invariance, doesnot survive quantization, however. Indeed, it is crucialfor Quantum Chromodynamics to be consistent withwhat is known about the strong interaction that thistheory does have an intrinsic scale.
Massless QCD is how theories should be: the La-grangiandoesnotcontainasingledimensionlessparam-eter. In principle, the values of all quantities of physicalinterest are predicted without the need to tune param-eters (the numerical value of the mass of the proton inkilogram units cannot be calculated, of course, becausethat number depends on what is meant by a kilogram,but the mass spectrum, the width of the resonances, thecross sections, the form factors, … can be calculated ina parameter free manner from the mass of the proton,at least in principle).
1.1.13 Symmetries of massless QCDThe couplings of theu-, d- and s-quarks to the gaugefield are identical. In thechiral limit, where the massesare set equal to zero, there is no difference at all – theLagrangian is symmetric under SU(3) rotations in fla-vor space. Indeed, there is more symmetry: for mass-less fermions, the right- and left-handed componentscan be subject to independent flavor rotations. The La-grangianofQCDwiththreemasslessflavorsisinvariantunder SU(3)R×SU(3)L. QCD thus explains the pres-ence of the mysterious chiral symmetry discovered byNambu: an exact symmetry of this type is present ifsome of the quarks are massless.
Nambuhadconjecturedthatchiralsymmetrybreaksdown spontaneously. Can it be demonstrated that thesymmetry group SU(3)R×SU(3)L of the Lagrangian ofmassless QCD spontaneously break down to the sub-group SU(3)R+L? To my knowledge an analytic proof isnot available, but the work done on the lattice demon-strates beyond any doubt that this does happen. Inparticular, for mu = md = ms, the states do formdegenerate multiplets of SU(3)R+L and, in the limitmu,md,ms →0, the pseudoscalar octet does becomemassless, as required by the Goldstone theorem.
1.1.14 Quark massesThe 8 lightest mesons,π+,π0,π−,K+,K0, ¯K0,K−,η,do have the quantum numbers of the Nambu-Goldstonebosons, but massless they are not. The reason is thatwe are not living in the paradise described above: thelight quark masses are different from zero. Accordingly,the Lagrangian of QCD is only approximately invariantunder chiral rotations, to the extent that the symmetrybreaking parametersmu, md, ms are small. Since theydiffer, the multiplets split. In particular, the Nambu-Goldstone bosons pick up mass.
Even before the discovery of QCD, attempts at esti-mating the masses of the quarks were made. In particu-lar, nonrelativistic bound state models for mesons andbaryons where constructed. In these models, the protonmass is dominated by the sum of the masses of its con-stituents: mu + mu + md ≃mp, mu ≃md ≃300 MeV.
With the discovery of QCD, the mass of the quarksbecame an unambiguous concept: the quark masses oc-cur in the Lagrangian of the theory. Treating the massterm as a perturbation, one finds that the expansion ofm2π+ in powers ofmu, md, ms starts withm2π+ = (mu+md)B0 + ... The constantB0 also determines the firstterm in the expansion of the square of the kaon masses:m2K+ = (mu+ ms)B0 + ... , m2K0 = (md+ ms)B0 + ...
Since the kaons are significantly heavier than the pions,these relations imply thatms must be large comparedto mu, md.
The first crude estimate of the quark masses withinQCD relied on a model for the wave functions ofπ, K,ρ, which was based on SU(6) (spin-flavor-symmetry)and led to B0 ≃ 32 mρFρ/Fπ. Numerically, this yieldsB0 ≃1.8 GeV. For the mean mass of the two lightestquarks,mud ≡12 (mu+md),thisestimateimplies mud ≃5 MeV, while the mass of the strange quark becomesms ≃135 MeV [53]. Similar mass patterns were foundearlier, within the Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model [54] oron the basis of sum rules [55].
1.1.15 Breaking of isospin symmetryFrom the time Heisenberg had introduced isospin sym-metry, it was taken for granted that the strong inter-action strictly conserves isospin. QCD does have thissymmetry if and only if mu = md. If that conditionwere met, the mass difference between proton and neu-tron would be due exclusively to the e.m.interaction.
This immediately gives rise to a qualitative problem:why is the charged particle, the proton, lighter than itsneutral partner, the neutron?The Cottingham formula [56] states that the lead-ing contribution of the e.m. interaction to the mass of aparticle is determined by the cross section for electronscattering on this particle. We evaluated the formulaon the basis of Bjorken scaling and of the experimen-tal data for electron scattering on protons and neutronsavailable at the time. Since we found that the electro-magnetic self energy of the proton is larger than the oneof the neutron, we concluded that the strong interactiondoes not conserve isospin: even if the e.m. interaction isturned off,mu must be different frommd. In fact, the12 1 THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONSfirst crude estimate for the masses of the light quarks[57],mu ≃4 MeV, md ≃7 MeV, ms ≃135 MeV, (1.1.9)indicated thatmd must be almost twice as large asmu.
It took quite a while before this bizarre patternwas generally accepted. The Dashen theorem [58] statesthat, in a world where the quarks are massless, thee.m.self energies of the kaons and pions obey the re-lation m2 emK+ −m2 emK0 = m2 emπ+ −m2 emπ0 . If the massdifferences were dominated by the e.m.interaction, thecharged kaon would be heavier than the neutral one.
Hence the mass difference between the kaons cannotbe due to the electromagnetic interaction, either. Theestimates for the quark mass ratios obtained with theDashen theorem confirm the above pattern [59].
1.1.16 Approximate symmetries are natural inQCDAt first sight, the fact that mu strongly differs frommd is puzzling: if this is so, why is isospin such a goodquantum number? The key observation here is the onediscussed in Section1.1.12: QCD has an intrinsic scale,Λ. For isospin to represent an approximate symmetry, itisnotnecessarythat md−mu issmallcomparedto mu+md. It suffices that the symmetry breaking parameteris small compared to the intrinsic scale,md−mu ≪Λ.
Inthecaseoftheeightfoldway,thesymmetrybreak-ing parameters are the differences between the massesof the three light quarks. If they are small comparedto the intrinsic scale of QCD, then the Green func-tions, masses, form factors, cross sections …are approx-imately invariant under the group SU(3)R+L. Isospin isan even better symmetry, because the relevant symme-try breaking parameter is smaller,md−mu ≪ms−mu.
The fact thatm2π+ is small compared tom2K+ impliesmu+md ≪mu+ms. Hence all three light quark massesmust be small compared to the scale of QCD.
In the framework of QCD, the presence of an ap-proximate chiral symmetry group of the form SU(3)R×SU(3)L thus has a very simple explanation: it so hap-pens that the masses ofu, dand sare small. We do notknow why, but there is no doubt that this is so. Thequark masses represent a perturbation, which in firstapproximation can be neglected – in first approxima-tion, the world is the paradise described above.
1.1.17 Ratios of quark massesThe confinement of color implies that the masses ofthe quarks cannot be identified by means of the four-momentum of a one-particle state – the spectrum of thetheory does not contain such states. As parameters oc-curring in the Lagrangian, they need to be renormalizedand the renormalized mass depends on the regulariza-tion used to set up the theory. In theMS scheme [60–62], they depend on the running scale – only their ratiosrepresent physical quantities. Among the three lightestquarks, there are two independent mass ratios, whichit is convenient to identify withS = msmud, R = ms −mudmd −mu, (1.1.10)where mud ≡12 (mu + md).
Since the isospin breaking effects due to the e.m. in-teraction are not negligible, the physical masses of theGoldstone boson octet must be distinguished from theirmasses in QCD, i.e. in the absence of the electroweakinteractions. I denote the latter by ˆmP and use thesymbol ˆmK for the mean square kaon mass in QCD,ˆm2K ≡12 ( ˆm2K+ + ˆm2K0 ). The fact that the expansion ofthe square of the Goldstone boson masses in powers ofmu, md, ms starts with a linear term implies that, inthe chiral limit, their ratios are determined byRand S.
In particular, the expansion of the ratios ofˆm2π+ , ˆm2K+and ˆm2K0 starts with2 ˆm2Kˆm2π+= (S+ 1){1 + ∆S}, (1.1.11)ˆm2K −ˆm2π+ˆm2K0 −ˆm2K+= R{1 + ∆R}, (1.1.12)where ∆S as well as∆R vanish in the chiral limit – theyrepresent corrections ofO(M). The left hand sides onlyinvolve the masses ofπ+, K+ and K0. Invariance ofQCD under charge conjugation implies that the massesof π−, K− and ¯K0 coincide with these. There are lowenergy theorems analogous to (1.1.11), (1.1.12), involv-ing the remaining members of the octet,π0 and η, butthese are more complicated because the states|π0⟩and|η⟩undergo mixing {at leading order, chiral symmetryimplies that the mixing angle is given by tan(2θ) =√3/2R}. In the isospin limit, {mu = md, e = 0 },the masses of π0 and π+ coincide and ˆmη obeys theGell-Mann-Okubo formula,( ˆm2η −ˆm2K)/( ˆm2K −ˆm2π) =13 {1 + O(M)}.
While the accuracy to whichS can be determinedon the lattice is amazing, the uncertainty inRis largerby almost an order of magnitude [63]:S = 27.42(12) , R = 38.1(1.5) . (1.1.13)The reason is thatR concerns isospin breaking effects.
The contributions arising from QED are not negligibleat this precision and since the e.m. interaction is of longrange, it is more difficult to simulate on a lattice.1.1 The strong interactions 13The difference shows up even more clearly in thecorrections. The available lattice results [63] lead to∆S = 0 .057(7), indicating that the low energy theo-rem(1.1.11)picksupremarkablysmallcorrectionsfromhigher orders of the quark mass expansion. Those oc-curringintheGell-Mann-Okuboformulaarealsoknownto be very small. The number∆R = −0.016(57) ob-tained from the available lattice results is also small,but the uncertainty is so large that even the sign of thecorrection remains open.
The quantities ∆S, ∆R exclusively concern QCDand could be determined to high precision with avail-able methods, in the framework ofNf = 1+1+1 : threeflavours of different mass. For isospin breaking quanti-ties, the available results come with a large error be-cause they do not concern QCD alone but are obtainedfrom a calculation of the physical masses, so that thee.m. interaction cannot be ignored. A precise calcula-tion of ˆmπ+ , ˆmK+ , ˆmK0 within lattice QCD would beof considerable interest as it would allow to subject avenerable low energy theorem for the quark mass ratioQ2 ≡(m2s −m2ud)/(m2d −m2u) [64] to a stringent test.
The theorem implies that the leading contributions to∆R and ∆S are equal in magnitude, but opposite insign: ∆R = −∆S+ O(M2) [65]. The available numbersare consistent with this relation but far from accurateenough to allow a significant test. There is no doubtthat the leading terms dominate if the quark massesare taken small enough, but since the estimates for∆Rand ∆S obtained at the physical values of the quarkmasses turn out to be unusually small, it is conceiv-able that the corrections ofO(M2) are of comparablemagnitude. Formu = md, the masses of the Goldstonebosons have been worked out to NNLO of Chiral Per-turbation Theory [66]. An extension of these results toˆmπ+ , ˆmK+ , ˆmK0 for mu ̸= md should be within reachand would allow a much more precise lattice determi-nation of∆R.
1.1.18 U(1) anomaly , CP-problemEven before the discovery of QCD, it was known that,in the presence of vector fields, the Ward identities foraxial currents contain anomalies [67–69]. In particular,an external e.m. field generates an anomaly in the con-servation law for the axial current¯uγµγ5u−¯dγµγ5d.
The anomaly implies a low energy theorem for the de-cay π0 →γ + γ, which states that, to leading orderin the expansion in powers of the momenta and formu = md = 0 , the transition amplitude is determinedby Fπ, i.e. by the same quantity that determines therate of the decayπ+ →µ+ νµ.
In QCD, the conservation law for the singlet axialcurrent contains an anomaly,∂µ(¯qγµγ5q) = 2 i¯qMγ5q+ 2Nf ω, (1.1.14)where Nf is the number of flavors andω is specified in(1.1.6). The phenomenon plays a crucial role becauseit implies that even if the quark mass matrixMis setequal to zero, the singlet axial charge is not conserved.
Hence the symmetry group of QCD with 3 masslessflavors is SU(3)R×SU(3)L ×U(1)R+L , not U(3)R×U(3)L.
QCD is not invariant under the chiral transformationsgenerated by the remaining factor, U(1)R-L . This is whythe paradise described above contains 8 rather than 9massless Goldstone bosons.
The factor U(1)R-L changes the phase of the right-handed components of all quark fields by the same an-gle, q′R = eiβqR, while the left-handed components aresubject to the opposite transformation: q′L = e−iβqL.
This change of basis can be compensated by modify-ing the quark mass matrix withM′ = e2iβM, but inview of the anomaly, the operation does not representa symmetry of the system. The relation (1.1.14) shows,however, that current conservation is not lost entirely– it only gets modified. In fact, if the above change ofthe quark mass matrix is accompanied by a simulta-neous change of the vacuum angle,θ′ = θ −2β, thephysics does remain the same. Note that, starting froman arbitrary mass matrix, a change of basis involvingthe factor U(1)R-L is needed to arrive at the conven-tion whereMis diagonal with real eigenvalues. In thatconvention, the vacuum angle does have physical signif-icance – otherwise only the producteiθMcounts.
The Lagrangian of QCD is invariant under chargeconjugation, but the term−θω has negative parity. Ac-cordingly, unlessθis very small, there is no explanationfor the fact that CP-violating quantities such as theelectric dipole moment of the neutron are too small tohave shown up in experiment. This is referred to as thestrong CP-problem.
There is a theoretical solution of this puzzle: if thelightest quark were massless, mu = 0 , QCD wouldconserve CP. The Dirac field of theu-quark can thenbe subject to the chiral transformation u′R = eiβuR,u′L = e−iβuL without changing the quark mass matrix.
As discussed above, the physics remains the same, pro-vided the vacuum angle is modified accordingly. Thisshows that if one of the quarks were massless, the vac-uum angle would become irrelevant. It would then belegitimate to setθ= 0, so that the Lagrangian becomesmanifestly CP-invariant.
This ’solution’, however, is fake. Ifmu were equal tozero, the ratioRwould be related toSbyR= 12 (S−1).
Theveryaccuratevaluefor Sinequation( 1.1.13)would14 1 THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONSimply R= 13 .21(6), more than 16 standard deviationsaway from the result quoted forR.
1.1.19 QCD as part of the Standard ModelIn the Standard Model, the vacuum contains a con-densate of Higgs bosons. At low energies, the mannerin which the various other degrees of freedom interactwith these plays the key role. Since they do not havecolor and are electrically neutral, their condensate istransparent for gluons and photons. The gauge bosonsW±, Z that mediate the weak interaction, as well asthe leptons and quarks do interact with the condensate:photons and gluons remain massless, all other particlesoccurring in the Standard Model are hindered in mov-ing through the condensate and hence pick up mass. Incold matter only the lightest degrees of freedom sur-vive: photons, gluons, electrons,u- and d-quarks – allother particles are unstable, decay and manifest theirpresence only indirectly, through quantum fluctuations.
At low energies, the Standard Model boils down toa remarkably simple theory: QCD + QED. The La-grangian only contains the coupling constantsgs, e, θand the masses of the quarks and leptons as free pa-rameters, but describes the laws of nature relevant atlow energies to breathtaking precision. The gluons andthe photons represent the gauge fields that belong tocolor and electric charge, respectively. Color is con-fined, but electric charge is not: while electrons canmove around freely, quarks and gluons form color neu-tral bound states – mesons, baryons, nuclei.
The structure of the atoms is governed by QEDbecause the e.m. interaction is of long range. In par-ticular, their size is of the order of the Bohr radius,aB = 4 π/e2me, which only involves the mass of theelectron and the coupling constante. The mass of theatoms, on the other hand, is dominated by the energy ofthe gluons and quarks that are bound in the nucleus. Itis of the order of the scaleΛQCD, which characterizes thevalue ofgs in a renomalization group invariant manner.
Evidently, the sum of the charges of the quarks con-tained in the nucleus also matters, as it determines thenumber of electrons that can be bound to it. The massof the quarks, on the other hand, plays an importantrole only in so far as it makes the proton the lightestbaryon – the world would look rather different if theneutron was lighter …The properties of the interaction among the quarksand gluons does not significantly affect the structureof the atoms, but from the theoretical point of view,the gauge field theory that describes it, QCD, is themost remarkable part of the Standard Model. In fact,it represents the first non-trivial quantum field theorythat is internally consistent in four-space-time dimen-sions. In contrast to QED or to the Higgs sector, QCDis asymptotically free. The behavior of the quark andgluon fields at very short distances is under control. Acutoff is needed to set the theory up, but it can unam-biguously be removed. In principle, all of the physicalquantities of interest are determined by the renormal-ization group invariant quark mass matrix, by the vac-uum angleθ and a scale. In the basis where the quarkmass matrix is diagonal and real, the vacuum angle istiny. We do not know why this is so, nor do we under-stand the bizarre pattern of eigenvalues.
1.2 The origins of QCDHarald F ritzschMurray Gell-Mann and I started to collaborate in Oc-tober 1970. We considered the results of the experi-ments on deep inelastic scattering at the Stanford Lin-ear Accelerator Center. James Bjorken had predicted,using current algebra, that the cross sections showedat large values of the virtual photon mass and the en-ergy transfer to the nucleon a scaling behavior, i.e. thecross section is a function of the ratiox, where x isthe ratio of the square of the virtual photon mass tothe energy transfer to the nucleon, multiplied with thenucleon mass. This ratiox varies from zero to one.
Since in the scaling region the cross sections weredetermined by the commutator of two electromagneticcurrents at nearly lightlike distances, Gell-Mann and Iassumed, that this commutator near the light cone isgiven by the free quark model. Thus the Bjorken scalingfollowed from this assumption.
The interaction between the quarks was assumednot to be present near the light cone. The cross sectionin the deep inelastic region determined the distributionfunctions of the three quarks and antiquarks, which aregiven by the proton matrix element of the commutatorof the electromagnetic current.
In the free quark model the commutator near thelight cone is given by a singular function, multiplied bya bilocal function of quark fields [70]. The matrix ele-ments of these bilocal operators determined the quarkdistribution functions of the nucleon. The integral ofthe quark distribution functions gives the contributionof all the quark momenta to the nucleon momentum.
Gell-Mann and I expected that this integral wouldbe +1, since inside the nucleon were only the threequarks and three antiquarks. However according to theexperiments at SLAC this integral was only about45%:1.2 The origins of QCD 15∫ 10x[u(x) + u(x) + d(x) + d(x) + s(x) + s(x)]dx≃0.45. (1.2.1)Thus besides the quarks there must exist neutralquanta, which are relevant for the confinement of thequarks and which contribute about55% to the momen-tum of a fast moving nucleon. This observation wasthe first indication that the strong interactions are de-scribed by a gauge theory. In such a theory there wouldbe besides the quarks and antiquarks also neutral glu-ons.
AfterwardsGell-MannandIconsideredseveralprob-lems of the quark theory. TheΩ− particle was a boundstate of three strange quarks. The three spin vectorsof the quarks were symmetricalls arranged, and thespace wave function was symmetric, since theΩ− isthe ground state of three strange quarks. Thus an in-terchange of two strange quarks was symmetric, butaccording to the Pauli principle it should be antisym-metric.
Another problem was related to the electromagneticdecay of the neutral pion. The decay rate, calculated inthe quark model, is much smaller than the observeddecay rate, only about 1/9 of the observed rate.
We also studied the cross section for the reactionelectron-positron annihilation into hadrons. The ratioR of the cross section for hadron production and thecross section for the production of a muon pair can becalculated in the quark model. It is given by the sum ofthe squares of the electric charges of the three quarks,i.e. 2/3. But according to the experiments at the CEAaccelerator at Harvard university this ratio was aboutthree times larger:R≃2.
Tosolvethesesproblems,MurrayGell-Mann,WilliamBardeen and I introduced for the quarks a new quan-tum number, which we called “color”. Each quark isdescribed by a red, a green and a blue quark. The threecolors can be transformed by the color group SU(3)C,which is assumed to be an exact symmetry. Measurablequantities, e.g. cross sections or the wave functions ofhadrons, are color singlets.
The quark wave function ψΩ of the Ω− is also acolor singlet:ψΩ ≃(rgb−grb+ brg−rbg+ gbr−bgr). (1.2.2)Thiswavefunctionisantisymmetricundertheexchangeof two quarks - there is no problem with the Pauli prin-ciple. The quark wave functions of mesons are also colorsinglets:ψmeson ≃(¯rr+ ¯gg+ ¯bb). (1.2.3)The decay amplitude for the neutral pion decay is threetimes larger, if the quarks are colored. Thus the decayrate is nine times larger and agrees with the observeddecay rate [71]. The ratioR for electron-positron anni-hilaton, given by the sum of the squares of the quarkcharges, is now also three times larger:R≃2. Thus theintroduction of the color quantum number solved thethree problems mentioned above.
Thecolorquantumnumberalsoexplainswhymesonsare quark-antiquark bound states and baryons are threequark bound states, since they must be color singlets.
Thus the mesons and baryons could be considered to be“white” states, since a particular color cannot be seenfrom the outside - the color quantum number is onlyrelevant inside the mesons and baryons.
In the spring of 1972 Gell-Mann and I tried to un-derstand why a colored quark cannot be observed - it isconfined inside a baryon or meson or inside an atomicnucleus.Weconsideredtousethecolorsymmetrygroupas a gauge group. The gauge bosons of such a gaugetheory would be color octets. I proposed to call thesegauge bosons “chromons”, but Gell-Mann insisted tocall them “gluons”, mixing the English language andthe Greek language.
We called this new gauge theory “Quantum Chro-modynamiccs” (QCD). The Lagrangian of QCD is [30,50]:L= q[iγµ(∂µ + igsλA2 AAµ)−m]q−14FAµνFAµν ,(1.2.4)where theλA are the Gell-Mann matrices, andFAµν = ∂µAAν −∂νAAµ −gsfABCABµACν . (1.2.5)fABC are called SU(3) structure constants. This La-grangian is very similar to the Lagrangian of QuantumElectrodynamics. The electromagnetic field is replacedby the eight gluon fieldsAA, the electron mass by thequark mass, and the chargee is replaced by the strongcoupling gs. The strong interaction constant is definedby αs = g2s/4π.
However, the big difference between Quantum Elec-trodynamicsandQuantumChromodynamicsisthepres-ence of the A2 term in FAµν, not present in QuantumElectrodynamics. This term shows that a gluon inter-acts not only with a quark, but also with another gluon,and gives rise to 3- and 4-gluon couplings.
The quark masses, which appear in the Lagrangianof QCD, are not the masses of free quarks, but themasses, relevant inside the hadrons. The masses of thequarks depend on the energy scale. They are large atsmall energies and small at high energies. Here are thetypical masses for the up-quark, the down-quark and16 1 THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONSthe strange quark at the energy given by the mass ofthe Z-boson, MZ ≃91.2 GeV:mu ≃1.2 MeV, md ≃2.2 MeV, ms ≃53 MeV.
These masses describe the symmetry breaking of theSU(3)F flavor group. Interesting is the violation of theisospin symmetry. The down quark is heavier than theup quark. For this reason the neutron is heavier thanthe proton, and the proton is stable. If there would beno isospin violation, i.e.mu = md, the proton wouldbe heavier than the neutron due to the electromagneticself-energy and it would decay into the neutron - lifewould not be possible.
Gell-Mann and I assumed that the interaction inQCD is zero at light-like distances. The light cone cur-rent algebra, which we had discussed in ref. [70], wouldnot be changed. The confinement of colored states, i.e.
the quarks and the gluons, would be due to the inter-action at long distances.
Soon we realized that our assumption, that thereis no interaction near the light-cone, was not correct.
David Gross, Frank Wilczek and, independently, DavidPolitzer calculated this interaction, which is the inter-action, given by the Lagrangian, but near the light-conethe relevant coupling constant is not zero, but only verysmall.
The QCD Lagrangian describes a theory, which isasymptotically free. At small distances the interactionisverysmall,atlargedistancestheinteractionisstrong.
Thus the coupling constant is not constant, but a func-tion of the energy. The sliding of the coupling constantgs as a function of the renormalization massµ is givenby the beta-functionβ(gs):µ ddµgs(µ) = β(gs). (1.2.6)This beta function is positive for many theories, forexample quantum electrodynamics. The fine structureconstantαis at the energy of 100GeV about10% largerthan at low energies.
The beta function can be calculated in perturbationtheory. One finds for QCD:µ ddµgs(µ) ≃− 116π2(11 −23nf)g3s(µ). (1.2.7)Here the coefficient “11” describes the contributionof the gluons to the beta function. The asymptotic free-dom of QCD is due to this coefficient - it is related tothe self-interactions of the gluons. The numbernf isthe number of the different quark flavors. For the threequarks up, down and strange one hasnf = 3.
In QCD one can describe the energy dependence ofthe coupling constant by introducing a scale parameterΛ:αs(µ2) ≃ 4π(11 −23nf)ln(µ2Λ2). (1.2.8)This scale parameter has been measured by many ex-periments (see Section3.2):Λ= (332 ±17) MeV. (1.2.9)In experiments one has measured the scale depen-dence of the coupling constant. It agrees very well withthe theoretical prediction. We also mention the valueof the coupling constant at the mass of theZ-boson,where it was possible to measure the coupling constantrather precisely (see Section3.2):αs = 0.1181 ±0.0011. (1.2.10)In QCD, Bjorken scaling in deep inelastic scatter-ing is not an exact property of the strong interactions.
The quark distribution functions change slowly at highenergies. This change can be calculated in perturbationtheory (see Section2.3). The results agree rather wellwith the experimental results. Also the gluon distribu-tion functiong(x) has been measured. Since the gluonsand the quarks contribute to the momentum of a highenergy proton, the following sum rule must be obeyed:∫ 10x[g(x) + u(x) + u(x) + d(x) + d(x)++s(x) + s(x)] dx= 1. (1.2.11)Using the scale parameterΛ, one can in principlecalculate many properties of the strong interactions, forexamplethemassesof thehadronslikethe protonmass:mp = const×Λ. The proton mass depends also on thequark masses, however the up and down quark massesare very small and can be neglected. The calculationsof the hadron masses are complicated and are oftencarried out by discretizing space and time (see Section4on Lattice QCD).
In QCD one can also change the three quark masses.
For example we can assume that the three quark massesare zero. In this case the flavor groupSU(3)F ×SU(3)Fwould be unbroken. The three pions, the fourK-mesonsand the η - meson would be massless and the eightvector mesons would have the same mass. There is nota ninth massless pseudoscalar meson, since the singletaxial current has an anomaly:∂µ(¯uγµγ5u+ ¯dγµγ5d+ ¯sγµγ5s)= const×g2s ϵµνρσFAµνFAρσ. (1.2.12)whereϵµνρσ isthetotallyantisymmetrictensor.Inref.[ 30]Gell-MannandIalsostudiedwhathappensifthequarksare removed from the QCD Lagrangian. In this case