17only the eight gluons are present. At low energies therewould be a discrete spectrum of particles, which con-sist of gluons - the glue mesons, gluonium particles orglueball (see Section 8.4). If the three quarks are in-troduced, the glue mesons would mix with the quark-antiquark mesons. The experimentalists have thus farnot clearly identified a glue meson. Presumably in na-ture there are only mixtures of glue mesons and quark-antiquark mesons. But there might be mesons, whichare essentially glue mesons, since the mixing is verysmall for these mesons.
It is useful to consider the theory of QCD with justone heavy quark Q. The ground-state meson in this hy-potheticalcasewouldbeaquark–antiquarkboundstate(see Sections8.1, 8.6). The effective potential betweenthe quark and its antiquark at small distances wouldbe a Coulomb potential proportional to1/r, where ris the distance between the quark and the antiquark.
However, at large distances the self-interaction of thegluons becomes important. The gluonic field lines atlarge distances do not spread out as in electrodynamics.
Instead, they attract each other. Thus the quark andthe antiquark are connected by a string of gluonic fieldlines. The force between the quark and the antiquark isconstant, i.e. it does not decrease as in electrodynamics.
The heavy quarks are confined.
In the annihilation of electrons and positrons atvery high energies it has been possible to test the the-ory of quantum chromodynamics rather precisely. If anelectron and a positron collide, a quark and an anti-quark are produced. The two quarks move away fromeach other almost with the speed of light. Since thetwo quarks do not exist as free particles, they fragmentinto two jets of hadrons, mostly pions. These particlesform two narrow jets. These jets have been observedsince 1979 at the collider at DESY, later at the LEP-collider at CERN. Sometimes a quark emits a high en-ergy gluon, which also fragments into hadrons. Thusthree jets are produced, two quark jets and one gluonjet. Such three jet events have been observed since 1979at DESY, later at CERN (see Section2.2).
Now we consider high energy collisions of atomicnuclei, for example collisions of lead nuclei. Such colli-sions are studied at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider(RHIC) in Brookhaven, at Fermilab and at the LHCin CERN. In such collisions a new state of matter isproduced for a short time, a quark-gluon-plasma. As-trophysicists assume that such a plasma exists also fora long time near the center of a large neutron star (seeSection 7.1).
Right after the Big Bang the matter was a quark-gluon-plasma. During the expansion of the universe theplasma changed later into a gas of protons and neutrons(see Section7.2).
In the fall of 1973 I was convinced, that Gell-Mannand I had discovered the correct theory of the stronginteractions: Quantum Chromodynamics. Almost everyday I discussed this theory with Richard Feynman, andhe also thought that it was correct. In 1974 FeynmangavelecturesonQCD.ButGell-Mannstillthoughtthatthe true theory of the strong interactions should be atheory based on strings.
In the years after 1973 it became clear that QCDis the correct theory of the strong interactions. I wasproud that I had contributed to the birth of this theory,which is now a major part of the Standard Theory ofparticle physics.
2 Experimental FoundationsConveners:F ranz Gross and Eberhard KlemptQuantum Chromodynamics or QCD: What a gorgeoustheory! You start with free colored quarks. You requestinvariance with respect to the exchange of colors at anytime and any space point, and the quarks interact. Thatis all what QCD requires. It is a remarkable simple con-cept. But: is this the true theory of strong interactions?In this Section, the milestones are discussed which con-vinced even sceptical physicists of the quark model andof the new theory.
A breakthrough was achieved in theNovember rev-olution: Charmonium was discovered at SLAC, thec-quark was shown to exist, the GIM meachanism (pro-posed by Sheldon Glashow, John Iliopoulos and Lu-ciano Maiani in 1964) explaining the absence of neutralcurrents in weak interactions found experimental con-firmation.
John B. Kogut’s contribution remembers the excite-ment in these days. A new spectroscopy came into lifewith a convincing interpretation based on the famousCornell potential. The mediators of the strong interac-tion, called gluons, carry – unlike the electrically neu-tral photons – themselves the charge of the strong in-teraction and are confined. San Lau Wu recalls her per-sonal contributions to the discovery of gluons at DESYwhere events were found in whiche+e− annihilate intothree bunches of particles, three jets. The three jetswere interpreted as processes in which the two quarks– observed as jets – radiate off a gluon which manifestsitself as the third jet.
TheevidenceforthecorrectnessofQCDgrewrapidly.
YuriDokshitzerremindsusofthemostimportantsteps.18 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSScaling, observed already in 1972, proved the existenceof interaction centers – called partons by Feynman –inside of nucleons. From the ratio of the cross sectionsfor e+e− annihilation into hadrons over that forµ+µ−the number of colors Nc = 3 was deduced. And thestrong interaction constantαs was shown to decreasewith momentum transfer opening QCD to perturbativeapproaches. Dokshitzer introduces many basic conceptslike jet finding algorithms, evolution, divergences andresummation, which will be discussed in more detail inlater sections.
2.1 Discovery of heavy mesons as boundstates of heavy quarksJohn B. Kogut2.1.1 SLAC, Light Quarks and Deep InelasticScatteringMany physicists and accelerators contributed to the es-tablishment of the Standard model. But two accelera-torswereparticularlyimportanttoUS-basedresearchers.
Theywerethe2-mileLinacandthe80mdiameterelectron-positronring,SPEAR(StanfordPositron-ElectronAsym-metric Rings), of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Cen-ter (SLAC), Fig.2.1.1. The Linac, which was built un-der the direction of SLAC’s first director, W. Panofsky(“PIEP”), and started operations in 1965, discoveredthe light constituents of the protons, the u, d and squarks, by measuring the inclusive deep inelastic crosssection ofe− +p→e−′+X. The deep inelastic scatter-ing program was critical to the founding of QuantumChromodynamics (QCD) and is discussed extensivelyelsewhere in this journal review.
When I arrived at SLAC as an incoming graduatestudent in 1967, theoretical research revolved aroundBjorken (“bj”) scaling, and the parton model of bj andFeynman. One of the tools of the trade was the InfiniteMomentum Frame (IMF). D. Soper, bj and I put theIMF on a firm foundation by quantizing Quantum Elec-trodynamics (QED) on the light cone [72]. This workinitiated the program of light cone formulations of fieldtheories (later called light front quantization by someadvocates) that will be reviewed in other chapters ofthis journal review. Later, S. Berman, bj and I devel-oped the parton picture of the final states of inclusiveprocesses involving large momentum transfers [73] andintroduced parton fragmentation functions. This workhad to address the mysterious phenomenon of quarkconfinement,thefactthatquarkswere“observed”whentheir properties were measured in deep inelastic pro-cesses, but no quarks were found isolated in the de-Fig. 2.1.1Aerial View of SLAC, 2020: The Linac, SPEAR andtheir descendentsbris of the collisions. Although considerable progresshas been made and many field theoretic mechanismshave been studied and proposed, especially in the con-text of Lattice formulations of QCD, the quark confine-ment problem remains open. It certainly was on manyphysicists’ minds in the early days.
2.1.2 Charmonium and The November Revolu-tionSeveral years later, during the summer of 1974, ex-perimentalists from SLAC presented some intriguingdata from the earliest runs of their very new electron-positron collider, SPEAR. A later section of this articlewill sketch the history of electron-positron colliders atSLAC since these machines were so central to the es-tablishment of the Standard Model. The data of thesummer of 1974 focused on the ratioR,R= σe+e−→hadronsσe+e−→µ+µ−(2.1.1)which, when plotted against the CM energy, showed ahigh, broad peak around 3.0-3.5GeV. This suggestednew interactions in the reaction’s direct channel. Onepopular speculation was that a new quark thresholdhad been reached. A notable paper [74] stated that thereported broad peak in R should be accompanied bynarrow resonant peaks at slightly lower energies. OnNovember 11, 1974, SPEAR announced such a narrowpeak at an energy 3.105GeV [75] with an electronicwidth ofΓe ≈5.5 keV. Brookhaven also found this statein proton-proton collisions in fixed target experimentsat the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron (AGS) [76]but that experiment didn’t have the resolution of therelatively clean electron-positron collisions at SPEARto measure its narrow width. With the news of a narrowstate at 3.105GeV, the high energy theory communityexploded with speculations. The charmed quark hy-pothesis was just one of many competitors. Recall that2.1 Discovery of heavy mesons as bound states of heavy quarks 19the 1960-1970’s was an era of discovery of many stronginteraction states that were described by non-field the-oretic approaches to high energy physics, such as Reggepoles, bootstraps, etc. The field was stunned again twoweeks later, on November 25, 1974, when SPEAR an-nounced a second narrow peak at energy 3.695GeV[77]! This challenged all the speculations circulatingworldwide. The charm hypothesis was the most appeal-ing to myself and collaborators since we were studentsof deep inelastic scattering and local field theory. Thecharm hypothesis was critical to the phenomenology ofthe electroweak sector of the Standard Model: the fourquark model ofu,d,s and c quarks solved the problemofneutralstrangenesschangingweakcurrents(theGIMmechanism [78]) of the three quark model. In addition,for the cancellations of the GIM mechanism to workeffectively, the charm quark could not be too heavy.
There were estimates that its massmc ≤2.0 −2.5 GeVwhich put it inside the interesting range to explain thenew resonances. In fact, the conventional quark modelof mesons and baryons predicted that the charmed me-son threshold of the SPEAR experiment, the minimumenergy to produce two free charmed mesons, each con-sisting of a charmed quark and a light(u,d, ors) quarkor anti-quark, should be Mc = 2 mc + 0 .7 GeV. Sincethe second state at 3.695GeV was very narrow,Mc hadto be above 3.695GeV. So, ifmc lay in the range 1.5-2.0GeV, the charm hypothesis appeared to be compat-ible with all the known data. The only “fly in the oint-ment” was that SPEAR had not announced the dis-covery of charmed mesons above 3.695GeV. Nervouscharm enthusiasts worried that maybe the charm ideawas flawed! Following Ref. [74], the new states were ten-tatively called “charmonium”, in analogy to positron-ium. Then the 3.105 state would be the13S1 state ofa c and ¯c, and the 3.695 would be the23S1. S-waveswere required so that the c and ¯c would couple di-rectly to the virtual photon created in the direct chan-nel when the electron and positron annihilated. I recallthat when these ideas were first discussed, many re-searchers sought to understand positronium better andran off to their physics libraries and read Schwinger’sclassic works on the subject! Positronium spectroscopyhad been calculated in great detail. This was possiblebecause the static electron-positron interaction poten-tial was just Coulomb’s law. One needed the generaliza-tion of this interaction potential to strong interactions,QCD, to repeat those exercises for charmonium. Atshort distances it was plausible to assume a Coulomb-like formula with the fine structure constant replacedby αs = g2/4π, whereg is the strong coupling constantof QCD. In fact,g should be the running coupling, ascale dependent quantity, andαs should be small, sayαs ∼0.2 for mass scales of∼2 GeV to accommodatethe success of the parton model in deep inelastic scat-tering where experimentssuggested that the parton dis-tribution functions satisfy Bjorken scaling to good ap-proximation forQ2 ≈2−3 GeV2. Next, one needed thepotential at intermediate distances, where thec¯c pairfeels the QCD forces of confinement but the system isbelow the charm threshold so that screening by lightquarks is not yet active. Studies of model field theoriesof confinement [79] and the lattice version of QCD [80,81] led to the idea that chromo-electric flux tubes formin this kinematic region and lead to a linear confiningpotential between heavy colored quarks. These ideaslead to the staticc¯c potential [82],V(r) = −αsr {1 −r2a2 } (2.1.2)where asets the scale of the linear potential. The needfor the linear term in Eqn. (2.1.3) was actually com-pelling in the original data. The ratio of the squares ofthe wave functions of the two charmonium states at theorigin was calledη= |ψ(13S1; r= 0)ψ(23S1; r= 0) |2 = 3.1053.695Γe(3105)Γe(3695) ≈1.4 −1.7(2.1.3)where we related the wave functions at the origin tothe electronic width of each state and used early datato evaluateη. What do the values 1.4-1.7 imply aboutthe potential? One can check that for a harmonic po-tential η = 2 /3, for a linear potentialη = 1 and fora Coulomb potentialη = 8 . So, to accommodate Eqn.
(2.1.3), a combination of a linear confining potentialand Coulomb potential was preferred. In Ref. [82] theparameters in the potential (αs,a) were determinedfrom the experimental data of the day by solving the ra-dialSchrodingerequationandimposingtheconstraints:1. The mass difference between the two charmoniumstates is 0.59GeV, 2.Γe(3105) = 5 .5 keV, 3.mc shouldlie between 1.5 and 2.0GeV, and 4.αs should be be-tween 0.2 and 0.3. At this point the authors of Ref. [82]needed a convenient computer program to solve the ra-dial Schrodinger equation with a potential of the formEqn. (2.1.2). Luckily, we had access to a skilled com-putational physicist with a trove of software programs!That computational physicist was K. G. Wilson whoused numerical methods to teach undergraduate quan-tum mechanics. Remember that this was 1974 whenuniversitieshadcomputercenterswithIBMmainframesdriven by punch cards! A good fit was found with hisprogram for mc = 1 .6 GeV, αs = 0 .2, and a = 2 fm.
It was important to check that these parameters led toa non-relativistic description of the charmonium bound20 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSFig. 2.1.2 Charmonium Spectroscopy. Note the P-waves3PJand the Radiative Transitions.
states.Infact,theaveragevelocity-squaredofthecharmedquarksintheboundstateswascomputedtobe (v/c)2 ≤1/25. The bound states of thec¯c system that resultedare shown in Fig.2.1.2.
The most relevant result in Fig.2.1.2 was the exis-tence of the P wave states that lie between the 3.105and 3.695GeV states. For a pure Coulomb potential theP wave states would be degenerate with the 3.695 state.
However, for a linear potential, the23S1 state residesat higher energy than the P wave states, as shown inthe figure, because the23S1 has a radial node. The ex-istence of these states led to the main point of Ref. [82]:there are additional states which could be found exper-imentally at SPEAR and they constitute strong, newevidence for the charm hypothesis! Strong E1, electricdipole, transitions would produce monochromatic pho-tons when the 3.695 state decays to one of the P wavesand then additional monochromatic photons should ap-pear when each P wave decays to the 3.105 state! Thesemonochromatic photons should be “easy” to find atSPEAR because it had a 4π general purpose detec-tor, the Mark I. The energies of the P waves and thestrengths of the E1 transitions followed from the wavefunctions found from the radial Schrodinger equation.
These results were catalogued in Ref. [82] and were re-fined in later more ambitious publications. Of course,the wave functions and the radiative transition ratesdepend much more sensitively on the parameters in thepotential than the energies of the P waves themselves.
In any case, the predictions of Ref. [82] were reason-able guides for the experimental program which discov-ered the states and the radiative transitions in 1976, thesame year that the charmed D mesons were also identi-fied in the final states of the electron-positron collisions!Many more predictions and calculations were presentedin Ref. [82]] and in similar works done by other groups[83].Someofthesepointswillbediscussedinlaterchap-ters in this journal review. In addition, more sophisti-cated potentials than Eqn. (2.1.2) were eventually stud-ied. Tensor interactions, fine and hyperfine interactionswereaddedin,andtheireffectsareshowninsomeofthesplittings in Fig.2.1.2 (Ref. [82, 83]). And the influenceof the nearby threshold atMc on the bound states wasalso accounted for. All of these developments did notchange the main thrust of Ref. [82]: the existence of theP wave states and their radiative transitions were spe-cial to the charm quark interpretation of the SPEARexperiment and gave additional motivation to the earlyacceptance of the Standard Model.
2.1.3 Electron-Positron Colliders at StanfordNow let’s change the viewpoint of this article and turnto the accelerator physicists and the experimentalists atSPEAR. There is a cliché that behind every inventionthere is a visionary. In the case of electron-positron col-liders, one of the field’s several visionaries was definitelyGerry O’Neil. Other visionaries were Burt Richter andMartin Perl. Professor O’Neil taught me physics in col-lege, but he was more interested in building accelera-tors to collide electrons and positrons head-on in theircenter of mass frame to create pure electromagnetic en-ergy and search for new states of matter. I recall thathe traveled to Novosibirsk, where a collider was beingconstructed, several times during a one semester under-graduate course on modern physics. Upon each returnhe “debriefed” his class on the progress of his efforts.
In 1965 Gerry O’Neil and others from Princeton andStanford built two 300 MeV electron storage rings inthe High Energy Physics Laboratory (HEPL) at Stan-ford. These rings resulted in electron-electron collisionswhich successfully increased the limits of validity ofQuantum Electrodynamics. However, it was basicallya “single experiment” machine, so during constructionGerry and his collaborators also sketched an outline ofa 3ĠeV electron-positron colliding beam facility. Theseideas evolved into the blueprints for the famous SPEARcollider at SLAC. To many persons’ surprise, just aselectron-positron collider ideas were gaining traction,Gerry’s visionary ideas moved in a different direction:to outer space projects, such as a permanent space sta-tion in an earth orbit. He left the fledgling field of col-liders just as it was about to yield great discoveries!The construction of SPEAR began in 1970 underthe direction of Burt Richter and John Rees, and it wascompleted quickly (in 20 months, four months ahead of2.1 Discovery of heavy mesons as bound states of heavy quarks 21Fig. 2.1.3 The 80m SPEAR Ring in a parking lot at SLAC.
The photo also shows the separatee+ and e− beam lines andthe detector hall.
schedule) in 1972 and at modest cost. The final SPEARdesign was the result of several revisions, forced on thegroup by budget restrictions and engineering considera-tions. During one of the revisions, the two planned ringsfor the electrons and positrons became one and SPEARwas no longer asymmetric. Nonetheless, the inventorskept the appealing name “SPEAR”!Wolfgang Panofsky was still the Director of SLACandhadlobbiedtheUSCongressandthefundingagency,theAtomicEnergyCommission(AEC),thepredecessorof the Department of Energy, to fund the constructionof SPEAR as a federal project. However, there weremany projects competing with SPEAR at the time,and it did not achieve federal project status. However,Panofsky and Richter did not want to delay its con-struction, so the AEC allowed SPEAR to be built usingordinary laboratory operating funds! This meant that ithad to be done cheaply. Some have estimated the costbetween 2 to 5 million dollars. So, the usual idea ofhaving the accelerator constructed underground withinan enclosed building had to be abandoned. SPEAR wasbuilt outside on a parking lot (Fig.2.1.3), with concreteblocks providing the shielding!Of course, the accelerator needed a detector or twoat its beam intersection regions. Richter and othersformed a Berkeley/Stanford team to design and build amultipurpose detection system surrounding one of theSPEAR interaction regions (Fig.2.1.4). The result wasthe Magnetic Detector or Mark I. This was the first4πgeneral purpose detector. It proved crucial in the com-ing discovery process. Other detector designs with lim-ited angular apertures would have suffered from the rel-atively low statistics of the early machines and wouldn’tFig. 2.1.4 Photograph of the wide angle SLAC-LBL Mark Idetector in 1974.
haveoperatedaswellwithdiversefinalstatesconsistingof photons, leptons and various light mesons.
It was clear at the time that electron-positron col-liders had many attractive properties: 1. All the energyof the beams goes into creating new particles, unlikefixed target machines, 2. The beams consist of point-like particles, so the interactions are simple and cleantheoretically. However, they suffer from one limitation:radiation losses. However, it turned out that “one man’sproblemisanotherman’sopportunity”.Fromthebegin-ning,severalStanfordfacultymembersrealizedSPEAR’spotential to produce useful synchrotron radiation, sothey asked Panofsky and Richter to devise a way toform an X-ray beam out of SPEAR. The X-ray syn-chrotron radiation emitted by the circulating beams inthe machine was much higher in intensity, by a factorof 10 to 100, than any other facility in the world. Itcould be used for imaging and structural analysis inmany areas of research, from semiconductor materialsto protein molecules. So, Richter’s team attached anextra vacuum chamber to SPEAR and made provisionfor a hole in the shielding wall for the beamline. Thiswas the start of The Stanford Synchrotron RadiationProject (SSRP). Even though it began as a parasiticoperation, synchrotron radiation represented an unpar-alleled opportunity!Richter also saw the SLAC Linac as a light source.
These ideas led to the invention and development of aundulator so that the Linac’s electron beam could be-22 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONScome the source for the most intense Free electron Laser(FEL) on the planet. The LCLS (Linear Collider LightSource) was born in 2009. It has led to revolutions inour understanding of the temporal dynamics of atoms,molecules and condensed matter systems. This is an-other story which we can’t cover here, but it is amusingto understand that a “problem” with circular collidersgrew into a new generation of accelerator facilities!2.1.4 The Revolution BeginsIn the spring of 1973, SPEAR began to gather high-energy physics data. By the next year, the machine wasmeasuring very erratic but generally much larger thanexpected values of R, Eqn. (2.1.1), the ratio of hadronproduction to lepton production. These early measure-ments were done with wide energy resolution, severalhundred MeV, to produce and measure many interac-tions and final state particles. But there were “incon-sistencies” in the data: small changes in the beam en-ergies sometimes led to large changes in the observedvalue ofR. These were the first signs of a new particle,which Richter’s team called the ”ψ”. ”Nobody dreamedthat there was any state, particle, that was as narrowin width as theW turned out to be,” said Richter in2003.”Sothefirstquestionwaswhatthehellwaswrongwith the apparatus, is there something wrong with thecomputers, is there something wrong with the data tak-ing?” [84]. No-one could find any such errors, and someresearchers on the Mark I collaboration pushed to res-can the region. In fact, by this time, SPEAR had beenupgraded and Robert Hofstadter, who was running anexperiment at SPEAR’s other detector, wanted to moveon to higher energies. Finally, Richter decided to goahead with rechecking the anomalous results, but onlyfor one weekend in November 1974.
2.1.5 Minute-by-minute Developments in theSPEAR Control Room“During the night of 9-10 November, the hunt began,changing the beam energies in 0.5 MeV steps. By 11.00a.m. Sunday morning the new particle had been un-equivocally found. A set of cross section measurementsaround 3.1GeV showed that the probability of inter-action jumped by a factor of ten from 20 to 200 nano-barns.Inastateofeuphoria,thechampagnewascrackedopen and the team began celebrating an important dis-covery. While Gerson Goldhaber retired to write up thefindings ’on-line’ for immediate publication, Fig.2.1.5,itwasdecidedtopolishupthedatabygoingslowlyoverthe resonance again. The beams were nudged from 1.55to 1.57MeV and everything went crazy. The interactionFig. 2.1.5 The SPEAR Control Room during the Big Night.
SLAC and LBL physicists analyzing the raw data.
probability soared higher; from around 20 nanobarnsthe cross section jumped to 2000 nanobarns and thedetector was flooded with events producing hadrons.
Pief Panofsky, the Director of SLAC, paced around thecontrol room invoking the Deity in utter amazement atwhat was being seen. This heavy particle, displayingsuch extraordinary stability, they called ’ψ’ and theyannounced it in a paper beginning with the words ’Wehave observed a very sharp peak’. Within hours of theSPEAR measurements, the telephone wires across theAtlantic were humming as information, enquiries andrumors were exchanged” [85].
Just two weeks later, the scene repeated itself, ex-cept at a higher energy, 3.695GeV. And the next S-wave charmonium state was found. Physicists aroundthe country had “befriended” various members of theSLAC/ LBL group in the control room by now andnews of the new resonance spread across the countrywithin minutes. I heard about it in an early morningphone call with bj. I also learned that it was he whohad suggested the high resolution scans in energy thatled to both discoveries!SPEARmeanwhilecontinuedtoyieldbreakthroughs.
In 1976 the P-waves were discovered through their ra-diative transitions [86] and charmed mesons [87] werefound above threshold as well.
Those were the days!2.1.6 The Path F orward. Hamiltonian LatticeGauge Theory and Statistical Field The-ory .
After Ref. [82] was published, it was time to move onto more fundamental considerations. I believed that themost important implications of the potential model hadbeen made and working through additional details wasless important. Instead, there were major challenges in2.2 Experimental discovery of gluons 23developing an approach to QCD that would lead tosystematic, potentially exact, predictions of the theory.
This was the thrust of Wilson’s lattice formulation ofQCD[80],whichwillbediscussedatlengthelsewhereinthisjournalreview.AHamiltonianversionofthetheory[81] was also developed because it emphasized 1. Thespectroscopy of the theory, and 2. The quantum char-acter of the states. An added bonus of this developmentwas a new formulation for strongly coupled systems forapplications to condensed matter physics [88]. This de-velopment mirrors the past of SPEAR: SPEAR startedout by establishing the Standard model of high energyphysics, and now is pushing the frontiers of imaging,free electron lasers and quantum systems. In parallel,the lattice Hamiltonian form of strongly coupled gaugetheories is playing a role in the development of Quan-tum Information Systems that may lead to new quan-tum computers and quantum detectors. These subjectsare now the central themes in a new generation of stud-ies and workshops on quantum physics [89, 90]. Refer-ences [81] and [88], which were originally conceived forQCD, are proving useful here, and are, in fact, amongthe most cited publications in the 48 year history oflattice gauge theory. Perhaps, these contributions willinspire the next generation of theorists who will pushthe frontiers of strongly coupled gauge theories into thenext era.
2.2 Experimental discovery of gluonsSau Lan W u2.2.1 Y ang-Mills non-Abelian gauge particlesIt was in 1954 when Chen Ning Yang and Robert Mills,who was a graduate student, shared the same officeat the Brookhaven National Laboratory and developedtheir non-Abelian gauge theory. Their office was sharedwith another famous physicist Burton Richter, who wasalso a graduate student at that time. Almost exactlytwenty five years later, the first Yang-Mills non-Abeliangauge particle was observed at the German NationalLaboratory called Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron(DESY). Here are some of the interesting dates. Theidea of Yang and Mills was first presented at the April1954meetinginWashington,DCoftheAmericanPhys-ical Society and the full Yang-Mills paper was submit-ted for publication on June 28, 1954 [36]. The first pub-lic announcement for the experimental discovery of thefirst Yang-Mills gauge particle was made at the Neu-trino 79 conference on June 18-22, 1979 [91], and thefirst full paper was received for publication on August29, 1979 [92].
Theword“gluon”wasoriginallyintroducedbyMur-ray Gell-Mann to designate a hypothetical neutral vec-tor field [14] coupled strongly to the baryon current,without reference to color. Since then, the meaning ofthis word has changed: nowadays, this word “gluon” isused exclusively to mean the Yang-Mills non-Abeliangauge particle for strong interactions.
2.2.2 Harvard to M.I.T. to WisconsinAfter being awarded my Ph.D. degree at Harvard Uni-versity, Samuel S. S. Ting of M.I.T. kindly offered mea postdoctoral position in his group. A few years later,I felt that, for the development of my career in physics,it was time for me to get a faculty position. Sam thenhelped me to look for a faculty position at the Univer-sity of Michigan, where he received his own doctoral de-gree. I got into contact with Michael Longo, a professorof physics there, and he was very supportive. ThereforeI applied to the University of Michigan. Since thanksto Longo I got on the so-called short list of candidates,I was invited to go to Ann Arbor for an interview.
In the meantime, I contacted David Cline, a pro-fessor of the University of Wisconsin I had met before.
David told me that he would forward my name to UgoCamerini, a colleague of his at Wisconsin. I contactedUgo. Shortly before my scheduled interview at Ann Ar-bor, I got a telegram from the University of Michigansaying that the position had been given to somebodyelse. I hesitated about going to that interview, but myfriends told me that I should nevertheless keep the ap-pointment. In the meantime, I got an invitation fromthe University of Wisconsin for an interview. Thus Itraveled from Europe for an interview at Michigan first,and then continued to Wisconsin for another one.
I remember very well that, when I had the inter-view at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, DonReeder took me out to dinner at an Italian restaurantclose to the University Square and we had a very nicediscussion. Don was at that time not only a Profes-sor of Physics but also the Principal Investigator forthe funding of experimental high-energy physics. Af-terwards, I met with a number of faculty members inhigh-energy physics, and they were all very supportive.
Again through the effort of Cline, I also got an offerfrom Fermilab. I had to make a decision, and I finallychose the University of Wisconsin. It was one of thebest decisions I have made.
2.2.3 DESYAfter becoming an assistant professor at the Universityof Wisconsin-Madison in 1977, I had to make the de-cision of what important problem in physics to tackle.24 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSOnce again, I got wise advice from David Cline, whohad helped me so much. He told me: “Sau Lan, youdo not need to work with anybody, and you have noboss. You are your own boss, and you decide what towork on.” At that time, the Department of Energy gaveone lump sum of money to the University of Wisconsinfor the faculty members in experimental high-energyphysics to share. From this funding, Don Reeder gaveme the positions of three post-docs and one graduatestudent.
Ispentthefirstmonthsofmyassistantprofessorshipthinking about what physics to work on.
At that time, we knew of four quarks: the up quark,the down quark, the strange quark, and the newly dis-covered charm quark from theJ/ψ, which has led to theNobel Prize for Sam Ting and Burt Richter. The imme-diate and important question is: how do these quarksinteract with each? For this, we knew very little at thattime besides that this interaction is likely to be medi-ated by a Yang-Mills non-Abelian gauge particle — thegluon. See Sec. 2.2.1. In other words, while the elec-tromagnetic interaction is transmitted by the photon,which is an Abelian gauge particle, this additional in-teraction is transmitted by a Yang-Mills non-Abeliangauge particle.
Indirect indication of gluons had been first givenby deep inelastic electron scattering and neutrino scat-tering. The results of the SLAC-MIT deep inelasticscattering experiment [93–96] on the Callan-Gross sumrule were inconsistent with parton models that involvedonly quarks. The neutrino data from Gargamelle [97]showed that 50% of the nucleon momentum is carriedby isoscalar partons or gluons. Further indirect evi-dence for gluons was provided by the observation ofscale breaking in deep inelastic scattering [98–100]. Thevery extensive neutrino scattering data from BEBC andCDHSCollaborations[ 101–103]atCERNmadeitfeasi-ble to determine the distribution functions of the quarkand gluon by comparison with what was expected fromQCD,anditwasfoundthatthegluondistributionfunc-tion is sizeable. This information about the gluon isinteresting but indirect. The discovery of the gluon re-quires direct observation.
During my first year as an assistant professor atthe University of Wisconsin, I was fascinated by theYang-Mills non-Abelian gauge theory. This was to becontrastedwiththeexperimentalsituationatthattime:whilephotonswereeverywhereinthedetectors,noYang-Mills gauge particle had been observed in any experi-ment.
From these considerations, I formulated the follow-ing problem for myself: how could I discover experimen-tally the first Yang-Mills gauge particle?From my previous experience with electron accel-erators and proton accelerators at DESY and BNL, itwas soon clear to me that the experimental discoveryof the first Yang-Mills gauge particle was more likely atan electron machine rather than a proton machine. Atthat time, two electron-positron colliding beam accel-erators were being built: PEP at SLAC and PETRA atDESY; after visiting both SLAC and DESY, I decidedthat PETRA was a better choice for me.
At PETRA (Positron-Electron Tandem Ring Accel-erator), there were five experiments: CELLO, JADE,MARK J, PLUTO, TASSO. I approached first thePLUTO Collaboration and then the JADE Collabora-tion, but nothing worked out. Then my luck changedcompletely: I ran into Björn Wiik, one of the two co-spokesman of the TASSO Collaboration, the other onebeing Günter Wolf. Björn asked me what I was doing;when I told him my situation, he was surprised andsaid to me: “Come to see me in my office this after-noon.” When I went to his office, he asked me: ”Whydon’t you join the TASSO Collaboration instead?” Isaid that I would love to do that. Björn said that hewould talk to Günter and also to Paul Söding, a seniorphysicist in TASSO, and let me know. Thanks to Björn,this was how I became a member of the TASSO Col-laboration at DESY. All three of them, Björn, Günter,and Paul, are excellent physicists.
After becoming a member of the TASSO Collabora-tion, the physics problem that I formulated for myselftook on a concrete form: how could I discover exper-imentally the first Yang-Mills gauge particle with theTASSO detector?A feature of the TASSO detector is the two-armspectrometer, which leads to the name TASSO — Two- Arm Spectrometer SOlenoid. The end view of thisdetector, i.e., the view along the beam pipe of the com-pleted detector, is shown in Fig.2.2.1. When TASSOwas first moved into the PETRA beams in 1978, notall of the detector components shown in Fig.2.2.1 werein working order. For my purpose of the experimen-tal discovery of the first Yang-Mills non-Abelian gaugeparticle, the most important component of the TASSOdetector was the drift chamber, which was already func-tioning properly.
2.2.4 Three-jet eventsOne of the simplest ways to produce a photon — theAbelian gauge particle for electromagnetic interactions— is through electron bremsstrahlung process, i.e.,e e→e e γ.2.2 Experimental discovery of gluons 25Fig. 2.2.1 End view of the TASSO detector.
The analogous process for the production of the gluonis [104]e+e− →q¯qgwhere q is the quark of Gell-Mann [17] and Zweig [18],and gis the gluon — the Yang-Mills non-Abelian gaugeparticle for strong interactions.
Once I realized that this is the way to discover thegluon experimentally, I faced the following two majorproblems.
(1)Howcantheseproductionprocesses e+e− →q¯qgbe found in the TASSO detector?(2) How high does the center-of-masse+e− energyhave to be for this process to be seen clearly?A couple of years before I became a faculty memberat the University of Wisconsin, the production processe+e− →q¯qwasobservedattheSPEAR e+e− collideratSLAC[ 105].
In the MARK I detector at SPEAR, both the quarkqand the anti-quark¯q were observed as jets, i.e., groupsof particles moving in nearly the same direction. Withthis experimental information from MARK I, I had tomakemybestguess astohowthe gluonbremsstrahlungprocess e+e− →q¯qg would look like in the TASSO de-tector. Since the gluon is the Yang-Mills non-Abeliangauge particle for strong interactions, it is itself a sourcefor gluon fields. It therefore seemed reasonable to be-lievethatthegluoninthegluonbremsstrahlungprocesswould be seen in the detector also as a jet, just like thequark and the antiquark.
Thereforethegluonbremsstrahlungprocess e+e− →q¯qg leads to three-jet events.
Fig. 2.2.2Two-jet and three-jet configurations at SPEAR andPETRA respectively.
Using the SPEAR information on the quark jetsfrom the process,e+e− →q¯q, I convinced myself thatthree-jet events, if they were produced, could be de-tected once the PETRA energy went above three times26 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSthe SPEAR energy i.e.,3 ×7.4 ∼22 GeV. The argu-ments were as follows:Figure 2.2.2 shows a comparison of the two-jet con-figuration at SPEAR with the most favorable kinematicsituation of the three-jet configuration at PETRA. Ifthe two invariant masses are taken to be the same, i.e.,√3E2 ≈ 7.4 GeV, then the total energy of the three jetsis 3E2 ≈13 GeV, which must be further increased be-cause each jet has to be narrower than the SPEAR jets.
This additional factor is estimated to be 180◦/120◦ =1.5, leading to about 20GeV. Phase space considera-tions further increase this energy to about 22GeV.
This answers the question (2) above.
This estimate of 22GeV was very encouraging be-cause PETRA was expected to exceed it soon; indeed,it provided the main impetus for me to continue theproject to discover the first Yang–Mills non-Abeliangauge particle.
At the same time, l had to address the question (1)above: how could I find three-jet events at PETRA?I made a number of false starts until I realized thepower of the following simple observation. By energy-momentum conservation, the two jets ine+e− →q¯qmustbeback-to-back.Similarly,thethreejetsin e+e− →q¯qg must be coplanar. Therefore, the search for thethree jets can be carried out in the two-dimensionalevent plane, the plane formed by the momenta ofq,¯qand g. A few pages of my notes written in June 1978and further historical details can be found in Ref. [106].
The procedure of mine did not identify which jetwould be the gluon. Still, this procedure has a numberof desirable features.
– First, all three jet axes are determined, and they arein the same plane. This is the feature that played acentral role in the later determination of the spin ofthe gluon.
– Secondly, particle identification is not needed, sincethere is no Lorentz transformation.
– Thirdly,thecomputertimeismoderateforthe“slow”computers at that time even when all the measuredmomenta are used.
– Finally, it is not necessary to have the momenta ofall the produced particles; it is only necessary tohave at least one momentum from each of the threejets. Thus, for example, my procedure works welleven when no neutral particles are included.
This last advantage is important, and it is the rea-son why this procedure is a good match to the TASSOdetector at the time of the PETRA turn-on.
I had Georg Zobernig as my post-doc; he was and isexcellent in working with computers. My procedure ofidentifying the three-jet events in order to discover thegluon, programmed by Zobernig on an IBM 370/168computer, was ready before the turn-on of PETRA inSeptember of 1978. For that time in 1978, the program-ming was highly non-trivial. In his later publications,he has used the name Haimo Zobernig.
2.2.5 Discovery of the GluonWhen we had obtained data for center-of-mass ener-gies of 13GeV and 17GeV, Zobernig and I looked forthree-jet events. It was not until just before the Neu-trino 79 (International Conference on Neutrino, WeakInteractions and Cosmology at Bergen, Norway) in thelate spring of 1979 that we started to obtain data atthe higher center-of-mass energy of 27.4GeV. We foundone clear three-jet event from a total of 40 hadronicevents at this center-of-mass energy. This first three-jet event of PETRA, as seen in the event plane, isshown in Fig.2.2.3. When this event was found, Wiikhad already left Hamburg to go to the Bergen Confer-ence. Therefore, during the weekend before the confer-ence, I took the display produced by my procedure forthis event to Norway to meet Wiik at his house nearBergen. During this weekend, I also telephoned GünterWolf at his home in Hamburg and told him of the find-ing. Wiik showed the event in his plenary talk “FirstResults from PETRA”, acknowledging that it was mywork with Zobernig by putting our names on his trans-parency of the three-jet event, and referred to me forquestions. Donald Perkins of Oxford University tookthis offer and challenged me by wanting to see all fortyTASSO events. I showed him all forty events, and, afterwe had spent some time together studying the events,he was convinced.
With these three-jet events, the question is: whatare the three jets? Since quarks are fermions, and twofermions (electron and positron) cannot become threefermions, it immediately follows that these three jetscannot all be quarks and antiquarks. In other words,anew particle has been discovered .
The earliest papers related to the PETRA three-jetevents are Refs. [91, 92, 107, 108] all by members of theTASSO Collaboration, andTASSO Note 84 , June 26,1979 (by Sau Lan Wu and Haimo Zobernig). Ref. [107]provides the method of analysis used in the four laterpapers, which all give experimental results.
Very shortly afterwards, the other experiments atPETRA — JADE, MARK J, and PLUTO Collabora-tions — published their own three-jet analyses. Theirearly papers related to the PETRA three-jet events areRefs. [109–111], and their results all confirm the earlierones of TASSO. Since this discovery of the gluon wasthe highlight of the 1979 Lepton-Photon Conference at2.2 Experimental discovery of gluons 27Fig. 2.2.3The first three-jet event from electron-positron an-nihilation, as viewed in the event plane. It has three well sepa-rated jets [91].
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), LeonLederman, Director of FNAL, called a press conferenceon the discovery of the gluon.
Because of the discovery of the gluon by the TASSOCollaboration, Söding, Wiik, Wolf, and I were awardedthe 1995 European Physical Society High Energy andParticle Physics Prize. With my leading role in thisdiscovery, I was chosen to give the acceptance speechat the EPS award ceremony.
ThiswashowthefirstYang-Millsnon-Abeliangaugeparticle was discovered experimentally at DESY, Ham-burg, Germany in the spring of 1979, a quarter of acentury after the original paper of Chen Ning Yang andRobert Mills. Four years later, the second and thirdYang-Mills non-Abelian gauge particles — theW andZ — were discovered at CERN by the UA1 and UA2Collaborations [112–115].
TheexperimentaldiscoveryoftheseYang-Millsnon-Abelian gauge particles points to another prophetic fea-ture of the original paper of Yang and Mills [36]: themass of the first Yang-Mills gauge particle has beenfound to be nearly zero, while those of the second andthird Yang-Mills gauge particle are quite high – about80GeV for the W and 91GeV for the Z. The rele-vant sentence in the original paper [36] is the following:“We have therefore not been able to conclude anythingabout the mass of theb quantum.” For further com-ments on this point, see pp.19-21 of [116].
2.2.6 Some later developmentsThe discovery of the gluon in 1979 was not only the dis-covery of a new elementary particle, but also the firstelementary boson that has been seen experimentally asa jet. Indeed, it is so far the ONLY elementary bosonseen this way. In principle, a scalar quark would sharethis property, but no scalar quark has ever been ob-served in any experiment.
The discovery of such a new type of elementaryparticle is guaranteed to lead to subsequent new un-derstanding of fundamental physics, both experimentaland theoretical. Here I will discuss one of the of themost important experimetal consequences of this 1979discovery of the gluon; the role it plays in the 2012 dis-covery of the Higgs particle.
An important theoretical topic, the very recent un-derstanding of the quark-gluon coupling constantgs, isdiscussed in considerable detail in Sec. 3, and briefly inmy Summary and Outlook, Sec.2.2.8.
2.2.7 Role of gluon in the discovery of the Higgsparticle [ 38–40]Since the gluon is the Yang–Mills gauge particle forstrong interactions, to a good approximation a protonconsists of a number of gluons in addition to two uquarks, one d quark, and some sea-quarks. Since thecoupling of the Higgs particle to any elementary parti-cle is proportional to its mass, there is little couplingbetween the Higgs particle and these constituents ofthe proton. Instead, some heavy particle needs to beproduced in a proton-proton collision, for example atLHC, and is then used to couple to the Higgs parti-cle. Among all the known elementary particles, the topquark t, with a mass of 173GeV/c2, is the heaviest[117,118].
The top quark, which may be virtual, is producedpredominantly together with an anti-top quark or ananti-bottom quark [119]. Since the top quark has acharge of +2/3 and is a color triplet, such pairs canbe produced by(a) a photon:γ →t¯t;(b) aZ: Z →t¯t;(c) aW: W+ →t¯b; or(d) ag: g→t¯t.
As discussed in the preceding paragraph, there is nophoton,or Z,or W asaconstituentoftheproton.Since,on the other hand, there are gluons in the proton, (d)is by far the most important production process for thetop quark.
Because of color conservation — the gluon has colorbut not the Higgs particle — the top and anti-top pair28 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSproduced by a gluon cannot annihilate into a Higgs par-ticle. In order for this annihilation into a Higgs particleto occur, it is necessary for the top or the anti-top quarkto interact with a second gluon to change its color con-tent. It is therefore necessary to involve two gluons,one each from the protons of the two opposing beamsof LHC, and we are led to the diagram of Fig.2.2.4for Higgs production. This production process is called“gluon–gluon fusion” (also called “gluon fusion”). Asexpected from the large mass of the top quark, thisgluon–gluon fusion is by far the most important Higgsproduction process, and shows the central role playedby the gluon in the discovery of the Higgs particle in2012.
Fig. 2.2.4Feynman diagram for the Higgs (H) production bygluon–gluon fusion (also called gluon fusion).
The percentage of this gluon-gluon fusion contribu-tion to the Higgs production cross section depends onthe mass of the Higgs particle. For the actual mass ofthe Higgs particle, the gluon contributes, through thisgluon-gluon fusion process, about 90% of Higgs produc-tion at the Large Hadron Collider. A more dramatic,but perhaps unfair, way of saying the same is that, ifthere were no gluon, the Higgs particle could not havebeen discovered for years!2.2.8 Summary and outlookOne of the most influential papers in theoretical physicsduring the second half of the twentieth century — verylikely the most important and influential one — is thatof Yang and Mills published in 1954 [36]. The impor-tance of this paper on the non-Abelian quantum gaugetheory is due to that (1) it presents a completely newidea, and (2) it points out the direction for the laterdevelopment of the understanding of particle physics.
Twenty five years later in 1979, the first such par-ticle — the Yang-Mills non-Abelian gauge particle forstrong interactions, later called the gluon, even thoughthis word “gluon” refers originally to a different pro-posed particle — was experimentally discovered withthe TASSO Collaboration at the German LaboratoryDESY [91, 92].
Another thirty three years later in 2012, this gluonplayed a central role in the discovery of the Higgs par-ticle [38–40] by the ATLAS Collaboration [120] and theCMS Collaboration [121] at CERN: this Higgs particleis produced predominantly through gluon fusion, i.e.,the fusion of one gluon from one proton beam with an-other gluon from the opposing proton beam.
As soon as the gluon was discovered in 1979, theobvious question was immediately raised: What deter-mines the strength of the gluon-quark coupling con-stant? I have kept this important question in my mindfor forty years. The conventional answer is discussed inSec. 3 below, but I have a novel idea about how theStandard Model might be modified to determinegs. Irefer to this idea as the “basic standard model.” It isdiscussed in Refs. [122, 123].
2.3 Successes of perturbative QCDY uri DokshitzerFifty years is a long time, though not for a theory asambitious as QCD. To cover all the pQCD applicationswould be mission impossible. There are many reviewpapers, both topical and anniversary, some good someexcellent. My review is biased, focusing on issues thatI personally find important and/or entertaining.
QCD?Sure. It is undoubtedly the true microscopic theoryof hadrons and their interactions. Whether it deservesa status of a well formulated Quantum Field Theory(QFT) is another matter. QCD is an ultimate proof ofnon-maliciousness of the God of physics. This theoryis as amazing as it is embarrassing, in enabling us topredict so much while understanding so little.
Perturbative?A perturbative (PT) approach means casting an answeras power series in a small expansion parameter. By cal-culating more terms of the series one aims at increasingaccuracy of a theoretical prediction. The quark-gluondynamics does offer such parameter: the QCD coupling.
At small distances it becomes reasonably small thanksto asymptotic freedom, inviting us to draw and calcu-late Feynman diagrams for interacting quark and gluonfields.2.3 Successes of perturbative QCD 29Successes?Countlessexperimentalfindingsspeakloudlyandclearlyin favor of pQCD. However, until the color confine-ment problem is solved, we have to invent hypothesesand build models linking quark-gluon dynamics and thehadron world. It is useful to keep this in mind whenwhat is commonly referred to as aQCD prediction con-fronts reality.
By trial-and-error we learn.
2.3.1 pQCD: Domain of interestThe name of the pQCD kingdom is Hard Processes.
We call “hard” any process involving hadrons wherethe energy-momentum that color objects exchange oracquire from (transfer to) colorless fields is much largerthan the confinement scaleO(ΛQCD). Classical exam-ples aree+e− annihilation into hadrons, Deep Inelasticlepton-hadron Scattering (DIS), or the Drell–Yan pro-cess of production in hadron collisions of massive lep-ton pairs or any other heavy colorless objects likeW±,Z0, H bosons. To the same family belong production ofheavy quarks and their bound states, as well as large-pTphotons and hadron jets.
Heavy quarks are often thought to be more friendlytowards pQCD than their light siblings. This is true,but not because a massive quark couples to the gluonfield more weakly than a massless one. The QCD inter-action strength is universal, as a matter of principle. Aninternal structure of aD meson is as non-perturbative(NP) as that ofK or π. At the same time, heavy quarksare typically produced with relatively large transversemomentapT ∼mQ and are closer to one another insidethe Q¯Q bound states. This is what actually explainsthat friendliness motto.
SometimespQCDapplieseventolighthadrons.Thisoccurs when a hadron is put under a condition forcingitsvalencequarkstosittightinordertohidetheircolor.
Small-sizeconfigurationsdominatewhenan initial statehadron, in spite of having experienced a hit with largemomentum transfer, is forbidden to break up and isasked to scatter elastically. Alternatively, a hadron canbe squeezed by demanding its exclusive production inthe final state .
This class of phenomena goes under the name ofcolor transparency. Diffractive dissociation of an ener-getic pion on a nuclear target is a bright example. Nor-mally a big nucleus would absorb the projectile. How-ever, if an incident pion happens to be in a squeezedstate, its valence quarks act as a small-size color dipole.
Its interaction with the medium weakens and the piongets a chance to penetrate the nucleus, defying the ex-ponential attenuation wisdom. What one finds behindthe target then is a pair of quark jets, because the prob-ability for such aq¯q configuration to return back into anormal pion state is too small to be counted on.
Also pQCD unexpectedly finds its place in thehA(AA) interaction environment where multiple scatter-ing of a projectile effectively pushes up the character-istic hardness scale,∝A1/3, putting interestingphysics like induced gluon radiation or jet quenchingunder pQCD control.
Whatever the hardness of the process, it is hadrons,not quarks or gluons, that hit the detectors. This makesthe applicability of the pQCD approach, even to hardprocesses, far from obvious. One relies on plausible ar-guments (completeness, duality) and tries to learn frominclusive hadron observables that areless vulnerable toour ignorance about confinement.
2.3.2 pQCD: Domain of applicabilityThe main lesson we learned from confronting QCD ex-pectations with reality is quite encouraging. The stronginteraction that is supposed to hold color bearers insidehadronsturnsouttobenotsostrong,ifyouthinkaboutit. The strong color force gets easily screened at largedistances by light quarks that pop up from the vacuum.
We have not yet mastered this mechanism quantita-tively. Meanwhile, the very fact that the confinementhappens to be “soft” dramatically enlarges the pQCDplaying ground.
Precocious pQCD. The parton model [124] pictured electron–nucleon in-teractions as elastic scattering of an incident electronthat transfers, via virtual photon exchange, momen-tum q to a point-like constituent of the target hadron— a parton. Inelasticity of theep collision is charac-terized by a dimensionless Lorentz-invariant parameterx= −q2/2(q·P) which determines an invariant massWof the final hadronic system:W2 −M2P = 2(q·P)(1−x).
The physical meaning of the Bjorken variable x be-comes transparent in a reference frame where the vir-tual photon has zero energy component,q0 = 0 , andcollides with the proton head-on (Breit frame). Herexbecomes a fraction of the large proton momentumPcarried by the hit parton (ppart ≃xP).
This picture culminated in the Bjorken hypothesis:that the probability of finding a given parton inside thenucleon isindependentfrom the momentumtransferq2.
The Bjorken scaling was expected to holdasymptoti-cally, that is when|q2|is so large as to ensure insignifi-cance of any re-interaction between constituents. In theBjorken limit|q2|→∞ the elasticepcross section dies30 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSout, while proton breakup into large-mass hadron sys-tems dominates: henceDeep and Inelastic.
ThefirstSLAC–MITobservationofDISsentastrik-ing message. Defying expectation, the scaling regimemanifested itself surprisingly early, right above 1 GeVmomentum transfer, as shown in Fig.2.3.1. Chargedconstituents (read: quarks), probed with better than0.2 fm resolution, behaved as free objects. And 50 yearslater they still do.
Anotherevidenceinfavorof precocious freedomcomesfrome+e− annihilation into hadrons which provides thecleanest environment for exploring QCD. Here all themurky hadron dynamics is restricted to the final state,and we can watch what happens to a pair of bare quarkscreated in the annihilation point and moving apart withlight speed.
Figure 2.3.2 shows the total hadroproduction crosssection, normalized by the QED cross sectione+e− →µ+µ− as a function of annihilation energy√s = 2 Eq.
We see that first the quark and the antiquark inter-act in the final state producing hadron resonances (vec-tor mesons ρ, ω, φ). As soon as the quark energy ex-ceeds 1 GeV, the stormy sea calms down abruptly andturns into still waters. Quarks with larger energies for-get about one another and behave as free particles.
They separate unimpeded and develop their privatemulti-hadron images — jets. (The story repeats abovethe charm threshold.)This plot contains more than a mere counting of thenumber of families of colored quarks,R(s) = σe+e−→hadr.
σe+e−→µ+µ−, R q.m. = Nc∑fe2f.
Notice a slight non-linearity of the pQCD red line inFig.2.3.2. Its origin — a QCD correction to the annihi-lation cross section due to gluon radiation:R(s)Rq.m.(s) = 1 + 3CF4αs(s)π + ...,Fig. 2.3.1 DIS structure function F2 = νW2 precociouslyscales with momentum transferq2 [95]Fig. 2.3.2 In e+e− annihilation, a quark and an antiquarkborn with momenta above 1 GeV fly away as free partonswhere CF = ( N2c −1)/2Nc = 4 /3 is the quark “colorcharge” (quadratic Casimir operator of the fundamen-tal representation of theSU(Nc) group). The runningcoupling effect timidly winks at us.
Tau-lepton as a pQCD blessing.
Even at smaller momentum scales, pQCD can be suc-cessfullyapplied.Itsufficesto“properlyplaceyoureyes” 6,that is to choose the right question to ask.
An amusing and practically important example ofprecocious pQCD control is provided by hadronic de-cays of the τ-lepton. Given lepton-quark universalityof the weak interaction, by simply counting degrees offreedom one would expectRτ = τ →ντ + hadronsτ →ντ + e−¯νe= Nc = 3.
Experimentally it is 20% higher:Rτ ≃3.64. Quite aserious discrepancy. We could refuse to discuss it bypresenting a legitimate excuse: the lepton massmτ ≃1.78 GeV is too small for pQCD to apply.
Meantime, there is a more constructive way to ad-dressthisdiscrepancy.InthespiritoftheBloom–Gilmanduality idea that has emerged in the DIS context [125],it is tempting to explore whether hadron and quarklanguages would complement each other. The leptonτdecays via many hadronic channels with squared invari-ant masss= (Pτ −pν)2 = mτ(mτ −2Eν) ranging fromm2π ≃0 all the way up tom2τ. Summing over all hadronstates and integrating overs one has a good chance tomimic the QCD prediction, should there be one.
On the QCD side, since the gluon interaction doesnotdiscriminatequarkflavors( W− →d¯u,s¯uinplaceofγ∗ →u¯uor d¯d), formation of the final state via virtual6 M. B. Voloshin2.3 Successes of perturbative QCD 31W− is no different from that in thee+e− annihilationcase. This allows one to express the pQCD correction tothe branching ratioBh via αs(m2τ) — the strong cou-pling at the tau-mass scale. Moreover, by employing theShifman-Vainshtein-Zakharov (SVZ a.k.a. ITEP) sumrules (discussed in Sec.5.8) designed to match theoret-ical quark-gluon calculations with hadron phenomenol-ogy via dispersion relations [126], it was possible toprove that the NP contributions are negligible [127] be-ing suppressed as a high power of theτ mass, (Λ/mτ)6[128].
The creator has chosen theτ mass wisely. It lies con-veniently inside a window whereαs(m2τ) is sufficientlylarge as to make pQCD correction significant and wellvisible, and at the same timenot too large to underminethe PT treatment. This resulted in [129, 130]αs(m2τ) = 0 .345 ±0.010,whichvalueisthreetimeslargerthatthereferenceQCDcoupling at the Z-boson scale, αs(M2Z), and is indis-pensable as a lever arm for visualizing asymptotic free-dom, see Sec.3 of this volume.
2.3.3 (p)QCD: Precursors and hintsQCD inherited quite a dossier of puzzles from the con-stituent quark model. It is worth recalling certain suc-cesses of the pre-QCD quark picture of hadrons, someof which are short of a miracle.
InheritanceAmongthefirstdynamicalapplicationsoftheconstituentquark model of hadrons were the 2–to–3 ratio of thetotal πp and pp cross sections [131] and an intrigu-ingly simple additive pattern of magnetic moments ofbaryons (see [132] and references therein). In these andmany other phenomena, well before QCD, quarks al-readydemandedtobetreatedasindependentquasi-freeentities.
Probably the most amusing example of such inher-itance is the so-called quark (or, more precisely, “con-stituent”) counting rule [133,134]. It links the exponentof the energy fall-off of large-anglea+ b→c+ d scat-tering cross sections with the number of “constituents”of the participating (initial and final) particles:N =na + nb + nc + nd:dσdt ∝sN−2, −t/s= O(1). (2.3.1)A chilling example of this scaling law is provided by theprocess of photo-disintegration of a deuteron [135]. Thescaling Eqn. (2.3.1) with N = 13 holds in the photonenergy interval 1GeV < Eγ < 4GeV while the crosssection falls by whopping six orders of magnitude! (See[136] to enjoy the picture.)Hints. Anapproximateconstancyofthetotalhadron-hadronscattering cross sections hinted at the presence of avector field (J = 1 ) as a strong interaction mediator.
Invention of gluons inspired a model of the Pomeronas a two-gluon t-channel exchange [137–139]). It wasa little while before the Low-Nussinov Pomeron pic-ture was confirmed and extended by rigorous analysisof high-energy scattering in a non-Abelian QFT [140],to become known as the BFKL Pomeron.
Another early benefit that QCD has offered was an(at least qualitative) explanation of the famous Okubo-Zweig-Iizuka (OZI) rule. It postulated that interactinghadronsdonotmindexchangingconstituentquarksbuthate to allow a quark and its antiquark that are presentin the initial state to annihilate. The OZI rule wasforged to explain unwillingness ofφmesons (φ= s¯s) todecay into lightu,d-built mesons. According to QCD,annihilation of aq¯qpair that constitutes a vector mesonhas to proceed via 3-gluons, so that the decay width be-comes small:Γ/M ∝α3s. It may look too brave to relyon the asymptotic freedom concept at scales as small asMφ/2 = O(0.5 GeV). However, bound states of heavierquarks (J/ψ = c¯c and Υ = b¯b families) can be relatedwith their QED counterpart — theC-odd e+e− boundstate — orthopositronium [74]. Constructing the ratioof the widths of hadronic and radiative decaysJ/ψ, Υ→ggg →X, J/ψ, Υ →γgg →γ+ X,one arrives at a reasonable quantitative estimate of theQCD coupling at mc and mb scales, correspondingly.
Here gluons manifested themselves as mediators of thestrong interaction.
Gluons as hidden constituents of the proton alsoshowed up indirectly in DIS as electrically neutral mat-ter that carries about a half of the energy-momentumof the fast proton.
The last but not the least: the nature of multi-particle production in the processes involving hadronsalso necessitates the presence of a vector field as inter-action mediator.
Indeed, the bulk of inelastic high energy hadron-hadron collisions was long known to produce multi-particle final states with hadrons having finite trans-verse momenta and distributed uniformly in rapidity. In1968 Gribov considered a fast proton with large energyE ≫Mp fluctuating into a system ofln E quasi-realparticles as ans-channel image of thet-channel vacuum32 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSpole (a.k.a. Pomeron) exchange [141]. Feynman has re-verted the picture by prescribingln Ehadron multiplic-ity to a fragmenting quark with energyE [142].
A uniform rapidity plateau is the key attribute ofvector particles, hinting at gluon radiation underlyingproduction of hadrons.
2.3.4 pQCD: Modus OperandiMassless gluons and quarks are treated by pQCD as ifthey were photons and electrons. This is clearly not anice thing to do. In the QED case electrons and pho-tons are legitimate QFT objects. They know how topropagate freely, have a definite relation between en-ergy and momentum and therefore can be prescribeda physical (measurable) mass. Causality and unitaryunequivocally dictate the analytic structure of their re-spective Green functions and interaction amplitudes ingeneral.
Quarks and gluons don’t have this luxury. Beingwell aware of this complication, pQCD ignores it in ahope to be considered innocent until proven guilty.
Renormalization: ScaleTo calculate probability of radiation, a gluon is put onmass-shell, k2 = 0, as if it were a photon. Intensity ofphoton radiation is proportional to the fine structureconstant αe.m. ≃1/137.04, whichever the process andits hardness. The on-mass-shell value of the QED cou-pling is a measurable quantity that determines multi-tude of macroscopic electromagnetic phenomena.
In QCD, on the contrary, the on-mass-shell cou-pling αs(0) is undefinable simply because “on-mass-shellgluon”isanoxymoron,asis“on-mass-shellquark”.
One has to choose some sufficiently large momentumscale µR ≫ΛQCD and employαs(µ2R) as an expansionparameter to construct the PT series. This is called therenormalization scale.
The dependence ofαs on µR (hence, running cou-pling) is governed by theβ-function, see Sec.3.1. Thefirst two coefficientsβ0 and β1 of the Taylor series ofβ(αs) are driven by the ultraviolet (UV) behavior of thetheory. Their values are universal, whileβn≥2 dependon the wayαs is defined.
Obviously, physical observables should not depen-dent on the choice ofµR. This enforces, throughrun-ning, a definite µR-dependence of the coefficients ofhigher order terms of the series, starting from the next-to-leading (NLO) one. In practice only a few terms ofPT expansion are known for a given observable (say,Born + NLO + NNLO, with N3LO becoming availablein certain cases). One puts the residualµR-dependenceof truncated series to a good use. By varying µR insome interval (conventionally, betweenµR/2 and 2µR)one gets an ad hoc estimate of theoretical uncertaintydue to unknown higher orders.
Renormalization: SchemeBy slightly lowering the dimension of the world,4 →D=4−2ϵ, one trades UV divergences for singularities inϵ to tame the misbehaving integrals. Logarithmic UV-divergences of loop integrals that renormalize the cou-pling translate then into a pole atϵ = 0 . By droppingit (“minimal subtraction”) together with a boring con-stant (an artifact of the trick) one arrives at a finiteanswer — theMS coupling. Dimensional regularization(DREG) [143, 144] is a gentle procedure in that it re-spectsandpreservesinternalsymmetriesoftheproblem(with gauge invariance the first to name).7 Being wellsuited for multi-loop calculations, theMS scheme hasbecome the standard of the trade.
Alternatively, one can introduceαs directly from aphysical observable without bothering about the UVproblem [146]. Called effective couplings , many havebeen suggested since, emerging frome+e− hadronic an-nihilation data [147], the Bjorken sum rule [148], staticheavy quark interaction potential [149] or intensity ofdipolegluonradiationoffnon-relativisticheavyquarks[ 150],etc. Efective couplings can be related to one another viathe MS expansions (see, e.g. [151]).
There is one scheme that deserves special credit.
KnownasMonteCarlo(MC),Catani-Marchesini-Webber(CMW), bremsstrahlung, or simply “physical scheme”,it first appeared implemented in the HERWIG MC par-ton cascades generator [152] and rediscovered in thecontext of an optimized pQCD description of inclu-sive heavy quark fragmentation functions [153]. Thesame coupling shows up in the anomalous dimensionof a cusped Wilson line (Polyakov anomalous dimen-sion) [154, 155].
This scheme adds to the MS coupling a definiteO(α2s) piece that keeps emerging in a multitude of ob-servables. Among them the behavior of DIS parton dis-tributions (pdf) and jet fragmentation functions (ff) inthe quasi-elastic limit1−x≪1, threshold effects, quarkand gluon Sudakov form factors and Regge trajectories,etc.
The reason is simple: it is the scheme that definesthe coupling by the radiation intensity of gluons withrelativelysmallenergies.Radiationof soft gluons isclas-sical by nature. In accord with the Low theorem it isfullydeterminedbytheclassicaltrajectoryofthecharge7 When dealing with a sypersymmetric dynamics, one has tosharpen the DREG tool to preserve the fermion–boson symme-try. This is achieved by turning to thedimensional reduction(DRED) [145].2.3 Successes of perturbative QCD 33(be it electromagnetic or color one) and is insensitive toquantum properties of the particle that caries it [156].
Infrared-finite couplingThe QCD coupling grows with distance and becomesinfinitely large at some point. This is true both at theone-loop level (β0) where it develops a simple pole,c.f. (1.1.8), (1.2.8), and in the two-loop approximationwhen one takes into account theβ1 term in the runningof the coupling. This is often referred to as the Landaupole/singularity in memory of the discovery 70 yearsago by L. Landau and collaborators of the explosivebehavior of running coupling in the context of QED.
Beyondthetwoloops,however,thesituationchanges.
With the sign ofβ2 depending on the scheme, some ef-fective charges at this level stop suffering from the Lan-dau singularity and instead freeze in the origin [147,157, 158]. Actually, this freezing is as much an artifactas the Landau pole itself. To unambiguously defineαsand establish its behavior at small momenta is incon-ceivable without cracking the confinement problem.
At the same time, the very supposition thatαs(k2)is finite for anyk2 ≥0 (more accurately, isintegrableovertheinfra-reddomain)enhancesthepredictivepowerof pQCD. The Parisi–Petronzio analysis of the differ-ential distribution of Drell–Yan pairs with very smalltransversemomenta qT andlargeinvariantmasses q2 ≫q2T provided a key example [159]. It was enough to as-sume that such a “good coupling” existed to get a PTprediction that actuallydid not depend on details of itsbehavior in the origin and agreed with the data.
Assumingtheexistenceofadispersionrelationmadeit possible to quantify the leading power-suppressed NPcontributions by expressing their magnitude via mo-mentum integrals of the “good coupling” over the NPdomain [160]. This approach proved to be especiallyproductive in the realm ofjet shapes , the majority ofwhich suffer from significant1/Qhadronization correc-tions [161] (see [136] for details).
2.3.5 Partons and JetsThe wordjets appeared (though only once!) in a mon-umental parton-model study of inclusive production ofa nucleon ine+e− (the process related by crossing withlepton-nucleon DIS) [162].
The picture of quark jets has been elaborated [163],and the Feynman conjecture implemented as a work-ing hypothesis to characterize the final state structureof hadroproduction processes with large transverse mo-menta [73]. In a footnote the authors remarked: “Thequestion of the ultimate fate of the fractional charge maybe a difficulty of the quark-parton model ”. Since “theimportant longitudinal distances in configuration spacefor electroproduction” increase linearly with energy andmay become macroscopically large [164] “This may im-ply that the active parton tends to travel a considerabledistance without interaction before disintegrating intoa jet of hadrons. Thus, there can be a separation offractional charge over large distances in configurationspace as well as momentum space ”. The footnote endedwith a prophetic remark: “However, this does not meanthat partons must “backflow” that distance to providethe necessary neutralization of fractional charge. Thiscan be accomplished, for example, by a polarization cur-rent created by parton-antiparton pairs created from thevacuum by the field of the active parton ”.
The worry was answered five years later when, withthe advent of QCD, responsibility for confining frac-tional charges has been laid upon color.
In 1974 Kogut and Susskind came up with a pictureof a flux tube (color string) that connects the quarks.
With the color field strength increasing with quark sep-aration, a chain of successive vacuum breakups,q →q+ q′ ¯q′ →(q¯q′)meson + q′ →etc, contained fractionalcharges, together with the open color, inside colorlesshadrons.
The authors have also remarked that hard gluonbremsstrahlung off theq¯q pair may be expected to giverise to three-jet events in thee+e− annihilation intohadrons.
The time had come for pQCD to face the challenge.
Gluon jetsTo unequivocally confirm QCD’s claim to an honorableplace of the theory of strong interactions, gluons had tobe found manifesting as true particles.
Section 2.2 is devoted to the groundbreaking dis-covery of 3-jete+e− →q¯qg events. We’ll stay on thetheory side and peek into a seminal paper that set upthe 3-jet quest [104]. What a shaky ground the authorswere pushing off back in 1976! Quote:• no direct experimental evidence yet exists for gluons(except possibly the fact that not all the nucleon’smomentum is carried by known quark constituents),• there is no direct evidence for asymptotic freedom(though there may be some deviations from scalingin DIS at highQ2),• fashion setsαs(Q) to lie between 0.2 and 1 forQ2 ∼10 GeV2.
The authors professed coplanar structure of the finalstate, cross section scaling in xT = 2 pT/Q, verifiedasymptotic 2-jetness , and rightly guessed a 10% frac-tion of 3-jet events.34 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSMoreover,theydrewapicturewithtwohadronchainsstemming from the gluon fragmentation and remarked,without much ado:Looking at [this] one might naively expect morehadrons to be produced in gluon fragmentationthan in quark fragmentation, and therefore thatf(x) for gluons should be more concentrated atlow x.
That is, higher hadron multiplicity and softer energyspectrum in a gluon jet as compared to quark one. Thislittle picture became a precursor of the Lund modelinterpretation of a gluon as a “kink” on the color stringconnecting the separating quark and antiquark [165].
IRCS IdeologyIn1977StermanandWeinbergdrewanimageoftwo-jetevents as opposite cones of angular sizeδ containing allbut a small fractionϵ of the total annihilation energy.
In the Born approximation,e+e− →q¯q, the backto back quarks fit in with unit probability. In the nextorder in αs there emerge a negative virtual correctionto σq¯q and a new 3-particle production cross sectionσq¯q+g, both infinite. However, the collinear divergenceat kT ∝Θ →0 (present in all logarithmic QFTs withmassless fields) and the soft divergence,k0 →0 (spe-cific for vector gluons and photons), cancel in the sum,leaving behind a finite correction∝αsln δln ϵ.
The SW construction became the first hadron ob-servable that, after the total cross sectionσtot(e+e− →X), enjoyed the power of the Bloch-Nordsieck theorem.
An ideology of Infrared-and-Collinear Stability (IRCS)was born:Ifradiativecorrectionstoagivenobservablehap-pen to be free from collinear and soft gluon di-vergences and thus the result is finite, feel freeto confront the PT answer directly with experi-ment, without worrying about NP hadronizationeffects.
The flag got hoisted over the boot camp from wherepQCD went on a rampage to conquer multiple produc-tionofhadronsinhardinteractions:“ the detailed resultsof perturbation theory for production of arbitrary num-bers of quarks and gluons can be reinterpreted in quan-tum chromodynamics as predictions for the productionof jets ” [166].
Defining and findingA narrow bunch of hadrons is not good enough: oneneeds an operational definition in order to work withjets,topredict,studyandworkwiththem.Thereemergedtwo major threads: 1) to look for a set of cones (ofcertain angular size) that would embed the final-statehadrons in an optimal way and 2) to look for a pair ofparticles closest in the momentum space and (if judgedclose enough) join them into one, thus recursively re-ducing an ensemble ofN hadrons to a few clusters —jets.
The original JADE clustering jet finder used an in-variant mass of the pair as closeness measure. It didwell experimentally, but did not satisfy theorists. Bythe time when the Workshop on Jet Studies at LEPand HERA was taking place in Durham in 1990, theo-rists became too greedy. To deal with respectful IRCSobservables (which JADE finder’s output are) was nolonger enough for them.
Jet rates suffer from (or enjoy, up to you) largedouble-logarithmic corrections, and theorists were ea-ger to make all-order resummed predictions. And theJADE finder did not allow that because of a weird wayit was dealing with small-momenta particles (soft glu-ons). At a brainstorm session a proposal from the au-dience was made to replace the invariant massdistancemeasure m2ik ≃2EiEk(1−cos Θik) bytherelativetrans-verse momentum k2T ≃2 min{Ei,Ek}(1 −cos Θik) tocure the problem. The next morning Siegfried Bethkewho spent a sleepless night testing the new idea cameup with encouraging news: thekT measure did well inyielding jets less affected by hadronization.
First reported in the summary of the Hard QCDworking group [167], the “Durham” algorithm [168] hasgot a “Geneva” cousin [169], and then “Cambridge”[170] and “Aachen” [171] fraternal twins that have fur-ther reduced hadronization effects. ThekT-algorithm,generalized to DIS and hadron-hadron collisions [172],allowedtheoriststoproduceall-orderresummedexpres-sions for the jet rates ine+e− and elsewhere.
For 15 years or so the clustering algorithms laggedbehind the cone-based ones. And for a good reason:N3operations needed to sort out a final state containingNparticles. Given that in thepp environment (not men-tioning pA and AA) multiplicities are large, this madeclustering procedures impractical.
The tables turned when an ingenious applicationof combinatorial geometry to the momenta clusteringproblembyCacciariandSalamhasreducedthecalcula-tion load down toNln N. Development of the “fast-kT”clustering procedure permitted to analyze large multi-plicity final states “in no time” [173]. This was espe-cially welcome since all then-known cone-based finderswere caught red-handed at violating the IRCS demandone way or another.
Alongandturbulenthistoryofcompetingjet-findershas terminated with invention of the “anti-kT” jet find-2.3 Successes of perturbative QCD 35ing algorithm [174]. It came in time — right before thestart of the LHC operation. It satisfied both theorists(as pQCD-fiendly, IRCS respecting) and experimenters(fastandproducingaestheticallypleasantroundishjets),and has established itself as the main (if not only) toolof the trade since. A full coverage ofJetography can befound in an excellent review [175].
Heavy quark jetQCD expected the jets initiated by heavy quarksQ tohave a hole in the forward direction —dead cone ofthe sizeΘ0 ≃mQ/E. Indirect consequences of this spe-cificfeaturehavebeenexperimentallyconfirmedawhileago: Q loses little energy (leading particle effect), lighthadron multiplicity in aQ-jet is reduced by a constant,Nq(E) −NQ(E) ≃Nq(mQ) [153].
A direct observation of the dead cone by the ALICEwas recently reported inNature [176].
2.3.6 Many jets, some loopsTo construct a scattering amplitude at leading order(LO: Born approximation with the minimal power ofthe coupling constant) one sums up topologically dif-ferent tree diagrams, each of which is a product of in-ternal Feynman propagators and vertices. Momenta ofall internal lines are fixed by kinematics so that no in-tegration is involved. Because of heavier combinatoricsand more complicated color structure, the complexityof the scattering amplitude increases with the numberof external legs (read: jets).
Loops and divergencesQCD jets have become an indispensable tool for col-lider experiments in search for new physics. It is im-perative to know the yield and structure of multi-jetfinal states with the best accuracy possible. One has togo beyond the Born approximation and calculate, stepby step, higher order corrections. A virtual corrections(VC) generates a loop along with an integration overthe 4-momentum flowing through the loop. With loopsin the game, complexity of the task rises to all newlevel.
UV divergences being dealt with, VC is still diver-gent in the collinear and soft corners of the integrationspace. But so is the inclusive (integrated) cross sectionof the same order inαs. This time, due to real emission(RE) of an infinitely soft gluon or a collinear 2-partonconfiguration in the final state phase space. CombiningVC with RE one gets rid ofalmost all divergences. Thesurvivingcollineardivergenceshideintoinitialstatepdf(and ff, should there be hadrons explicitly registered inthe final state). Apart from that, the answer is finite.
However it is difficult to get by subtracting infinities.
One needs to regularize VC and RE separately and con-sistently or, better still, to perform subtraction at thelevel of the integrand to avoid divergences altogether.
NLOEarly NLO studies sent a rather disturbing message:large corrections were found both to Drell–Yan [177]and large-pT production [178] putting under questionthe very applicability of the PT approach. There is agood physical reason why those corrections turned outto be alarmingly large. I will hide it from you for lackof space-time. One way or another the initial shock wasmitigated and a systematic attack on the NLO started.
The method that has been proposed fore+e− anni-hilation, used DREG to deal with the VC+RE problem[179]. An idea to employ the notion of color dipoles toaccurately treat collinear and soft singularities and can-cel them at the integrand level gave more flexibility andallowed to construct a popular general purpose schemefor calculating the NLO jet cross sections in any hardprocess [180].
L-loop VCs are given by4L-dimensional Feynmanintegrals. They are analytic functions of external mo-mentum invariants and can be reduced to a finite set ofbasic scalar integrals.
The problem has been fully solved forL= 1 [181].
This means that today all NLO amplitudes are known(with 6-gluon scattering marking the present-day com-plexitylimit)[ 182].Partonshowershavebeenpromotedto NLO as well [183].
NNLOSince 2015, the number of important processes con-tolled in the following order of pQCD (NNLO) hasbeen steadily increasing. In the bibliography titles ofthe Les Houches 2019 Summary [184] next-to-next-to,orNNLO appears155times.Drell-Yan/Higgs[ 185–188]and semi-inclusive DIS [189, 190] allowed to peek intoN3LO.
JustenjoythenamesthatappearintheN ≥2LOcon-text: CoLoRFulNNLO and Projection-to-Born meth-ods, Nested soft-collinear andN-jettiness subtractions.
A Shakespearean review [191] discusses pros and con-tras of DREG vs. subtraction regularization.
Mathematical aspectsTo calculate Feynman integrals analytically is notori-ously hard. General techniques for attacking loop am-plitudes were listed and demonstrated in 1996 and arebeing used since: spinor helicity formalism, color de-compositions, supersymmetry, string theory, factoriza-tion and unitarity [192].36 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSThe Loop-Tree duality approach (LTD) was initi-ated [193] and later generalized to become Four-dimen-sional Unsubtraction (FDU) [194].
Proceedings of the topical Florence workshop (cun-ninglynamedWorkStop/ThinkStart)[ 195]linkto200+articles that cover the basics and the progress.
An all-in assault [196] resulted in an astonishingsymbiosis of theoretical physics and pure mathematics.
Particle theorists, maybe already familiar with integra-bility, now have to learn twisted cohomology groups,Hopf algebra, algebraic number theory and other scarythings.
2.3.7 Resummation and EvolutionArt of expansionSeries in αs can behave well, as forR(e+e−), or looktroubling as is the case of diphoton production, wheremoving from NLO to NNLO changes the cross sectionby 50% [197].
In fact, independent of the observable, PT seriesin QFT areasymptotic, so that beyond N1/αLO thingsare bound to go haywire. This was not much trouble forQED, but it should be kept in mind for QCD, wherethe number of reliable terms in the expansion may benot so large.
Examining how violently a specific series diverges,hints at how much the NP physics affects a given ob-servable (infrared renormalons [198]).
ResummationOften αs acquires one or even two enhancement fac-tors: αsln Q2 (SL), αsln2 Q2 (DL), and the PT expan-sion fails. When this happens, in order to get a reli-able approximation one has to collect enhanced con-tributions and sum them in all orders. The Sterman-Weinberg 2-jet cross section acquires DLogs because ofa veto imposed on accompanying gluon radiation. TheQT-spectrum of a Drell–Yan pair or of a hadron regis-tered in the current fragmentation of DIS in the kine-matical region QT ≪Q, and an almost back-to-backenergy–energy correlation ine+e− were the first exam-ples of inclusive observables which, in spite of not beingsubject to any explicit veto, are still affected by DLogs[199, 200].
In all these cases the origin of one of the logs issoft gluon radiation which is relatively easy to control.
This makes resummation of DL-enhanced contributionsstraightforward and gives rise to Sudakov form factors.
Quark and gluon form factors manifest themselves ina multitude of observables characterized by the pres-ence of two different momentum scales. In particular,in distributions of various jet shapes, jet rates, etc.
It is important to emphasize that the very possi-bility of an all-order resummation depends on whetherthe operational definition of jets corresponds to the dy-namics of the QCD parton multiplication picture (kT-algorithms vs. JADE, as discussed above).
All-order resummation of single-logarithmic contri-butions (SLogs) becomes mandatory when we deal ei-ther with quasi-collinear configurations of partons withcomparable energies (DGLAP physics) or with ensem-bles of soft gluons at large angles with respect to en-ergetic emitters (radiative corrections to parton scat-tering amplitudes). In both cases particles involved arestrongly ordered intransverse momenta .
FactorizationA particle with the smallest kT in the game factorsout, in a sense that a singular contribution comes onlyfrom its attachment to an external leg. Generalizationof the Low theorem fromω ≪me to arbitrary photonenergies [201] was a precursor of the QCDkT/collinearfactorization.
Another arbitrary scale enters: factorization scaleµF. It sets a conventional border between PT and NPingredients of the problem. In IRCS observablesµF getsreplaced by a variable related to resolution, renderingtwo well separated physical scales. For example,yQ2 ≪Q2 for jet rates, (1 −T)Q2 ≪Q2 for the differentialthrust distribution, etc.
Whenever there isFactorization, one can carry outResummation, and interpret the results in terms ofEvo-lution and correspondingEvolution Equations .
A few examples of the application of this idea, bothwell-known and lesser-known.
KLThe Kirschner–Lipatov equation resums DLogs in par-ton scattering amplitudes with quark exchange in thet-channel [202]. Such amplitudes fall as the energysincreases, and higher-order DL contributions deceler-ate this fall. These DLog effects are inherently differentfrom the DLog effects due to accompanying soft gluonradiation (Sudakov form factors).
By isolating the virtual particle with the lowestkTin the Feynman graph, and using gauge invariance andthe unitarity relation, one can form the kernel of theevolutionequationforthepartialwaveamplitudes,withln kT as the “evolution time”.
KOSKidonakis, Oderda and Sterman have set the quest ofresummation of SL radiative corrections to2 →2 QCDparton scattering amplitudes [203]. In QCD it becomes2.3 Successes of perturbative QCD 37a multi-channel problem, since each gluon emission (ei-ther virtual or real) changes the color state of a par-ton pair. For gluon–gluon scattering, the anomalousdimension is a 6 ⊗6 matrix (for the general SU(Nc)case; which reduces to 5 ⊗5 for SU(3)). It dependson the scattering angle and, obviously, on the rank ofthe color group, Nc. Three of the eigenvalues of theanomalous dimension matrix are proportional to Nc,and thus respect the so-calledCasimir scaling (the per-turbative expansion running inNc), see e.g. [204]. TheNc-dependence of the other three eigenvalues is moreinvolved [205]. They solve the cubic equation whose co-efficients exhibit a weird symmetry between the numberof colors and the scattering angle:Nc ⇐⇒ ±ln(s2/tu)ln(t/u) .
This symmetry can hardly be accidental, but its originremains a mystery.
ERBLThe ERBL equation applies to exclusive high-Q2 re-actions involving mesons and baryons, e.g. electromag-netic pion form factor [206, 207] or photo- (electro-)production of vector mesons likeJ/ψ [208, 209]. Sep-arate components of the valence quark wave function(distribution amplitude) acquire differentlog Q behav-ior—anomalousdimensions.Thedominantcomponentin theQ2 →∞ limit is called the asymptotic wavefunc-tion:ψπ(z) ∝z(1−z) withzthelongitudinalmomentumof the fast pion carried by a quark.
It is manifest in the distribution of energy betweenthe two quark jets stemming from diffractive dissocia-tion of a pion inπA collisions [210].
DGLAPThe parton model implied limited transverse momenta.
InlogarithmicQFTs,instead, k2T arebroadlydistributedup to the external momentum transfer scaleQ2, result-ing in violation of the Bjorken scaling. The first sys-tematic analysis of DIS structure functions ande+e−fragmentation functions was carried out in the LeadingLogarithmic Approximation (LLA) based on selectionof enhanced contributions in each order of PT series,∑nCn(x)(g2 log Q2)n, in the framework of then-knownQFT models [211, 212].
In 1974 the results were recast in the language ofpdf evolving via Markov chain of independent1 →2parton splittings [213].
In 1977 arrived the QCD parton dynamics whosename was eventually settled as DGLAP [214, 215]. Itwas received with enthusiasm and gave rise to a host ofnewideas:jetcalculus,preconfinement,partonshowers,to name a few.
With anomalous dimensions now known in 3 loops[216, 217], DGLAP does its job, predicting pdf evolu-tion due to space-like cascades. Thanks to factorization,theydescribethefluxofinitial-statepartonsasaninputfor any hard lepton–hadron or hadron–hadron interac-tion. The same universality applies to the final state(time-like cascades).
Parton CascadesPartons have space-like momenta (k2 < 0) in the ini-tial state cascades; in the final state they are time-like (k2 > 0). In the LLA, parton splitting functionsin space-like (S) and time-like kinematics (T) are thesame: P(S)ba (z) = P(T)ba (z), and so are the anomalous di-mensions—Mellinimageof P(z).BeyondLLA P(T)(z)departs from P(S) acquiring, in particular,(αsln2 z)kterms in NkLL.
Originally, the picture of QCD partons was treatingthe Bjorken/Feynman variablex as being of the orderone. Then αsln2 z = O(αs) ≪1 and causes no trou-ble. However, whenxgets parametrically small so thatαsln2 x ∼1, an entire tower of these enhanced termshas to be resummed.
This can be achieved by modifying the “time” in theevolution equation fromln kT to ln Θ. In other words,by replacing thekT-ordered cascades (S) by ordering ofsuccessive splitting angles (T). Angular Ordering (AO)takes care of destructive soft-gluon interference and af-fects particle production.
BFKLThe BFKL equation [140, 218] was derived in the LLAing2 ln s=O(1) to predict high-energy behavior of scat-tering amplitudes in Yang–Mills theory.
Gluons reggeize (spin of at-channel gluon becomeseffectively t-dependent, J=Jg(t)). In the vacuum chan-nel ladder diagrams dominate with two Low–Nussinovgluons,now reggeized,connectedbymultiplegluonrungsstrongly ordered in rapidity (multiregge kinematics ).
This yielded the growing total cross sectionσtot ∝scαs.
The NLL correction lowered the exponent. A power-like energy growth contradicts the asymptotic Froissarttheorem, σtot ≤Aln2 s, but at available energies is le-gitimate. A need to rescues-channel unitarity ignitednew ideas and, correspondingly, equations: McLerran–Venugopalan Color Glass Condensate model of high-energysaturation(CGC),Balitsky–Kovchegov(BK)andJalilian-Marian, Iancu, McLerran, Weigert, Leonidovand Kovner (JIMWLK) equations, for references [219].
The true problem is that the high energy scatteringdoes not belong to the pQCD jurisdiction. This is not