38 2 EXPERIMENTAL FOUNDATIONSa hard process as long as no large-kT scale is involved.
As a result, the “BFKL Pomeron” is sensitive to thebehavior of the coupling in the NP domain [220, 221].
Strictly speaking it would be safer to apply to com-pact projectiles like bound states of heavy quarks, sayσJ/ψJ/ψtot (s).
Triggering a jet with pT ∼Q in DIS target frag-mentation region should expose the BFKL dynamics(Mueller-Naveletjets[ 222]).DGLAPevolutiongetssup-pressed over a large rapidity interval, leaving room forPT-controlled BFKL growth. Experimental data arenot yet conclusive [223].
Applied to DIS, BFKL predicts a steep growth ofpdf in thex = Q2/s →0 limit, equivalent tos →∞.
With DGLAP having its own way of making pdf rise,the two are difficult to disentangle.
BFKL vs. DGLAPThe meaning ofevolution in the two cases is essentiallydifferent. Action d/dln k2T, dynamics in x (DGLAP),vs. action d/dln(1/x), dynamics in ⃗kT (BFKL). Thekernel of the DGLAP evolution equation is a functionof the longitudinal momentumPba(x), the BFKL ker-nel lives in the plane of transverse momentaK(⃗kT,⃗ qT).
Eigenvalues of DGLAP are anomalous dimensions; thespectrum of BFKL — Regge trajectories. The origin ofDGLAP evolution is thekT-factorization [224]; BFKLrests upont-channel unitarity. In spite of all the differ-ence the two are intimately related [225].
2.3.8 Soft gluons and LPHDIt is soft gluon radiation that bears responsibility forfaster-than-logarithmic growth of particle multiplicitiesin hard processes.
Hadron energy spectra in jets brought an exoticfruit. It was not poisonous, but still not easy to digest.
Inside jetLEP [226], HERA [227] and Tevatron have found thattheshapeofsingle-inclusiveenergyspectraofall-chargedhadrons (dominated by pions) is mathematically simi-lartothatpredictedbypQCDforsoftgluons[ 228].Andthisinspiteofthefactthatthecharacteristic hump thatthe spectrum develops because of soft-gluon coherencewas situated as low as 1 GeV at LEP (and well belowat TASSO energies).
CDF studies proved the origin of the hump due toparton cascading (as opposed to nonrelativistic finitemass effects) [229] and confirmed the pQCD expecta-tion that the particle yield scales with maximalkT ofpartons, Ejetsin Θc, with Θc the half-angle of the jetcone [230].
Inter-jet particlesStudies of hadron flowsin-between jets added insult toinjury. The message here is even more surprising. In-formation about the color structure of the ensemble ofhard partons that form the jets is transmitted to pionswith energies of 200–300 MeV, which make up the bulkof the hadrons produced away from the jets (“QCDRadiophysics”) [231]. For example, a comparison of thehadron yield in the direction transverse to the 3-jet-event plane with the pQCD prediction of the soft gluonradiation pattern [232], yielded an independent mea-surement of the ratio of quark and gluon color charges[233], competing with results from hard gluon physics(scaling violation and 4-jet rates) [130].
From a theory standpoint, this similarity was notentirely unexpected. There was a premonition based ona semi-classical analysis of the structure of parton cas-cades in the configuration space which concluded thatwhen the time comes for a given parton to hadronize,other partons are too far away, leaving no chance forcross-talk [234].
Local Parton–Hadron Duality (LPHD) as a Nature-approved supplement to pQCD sends a powerful mes-sage to the future quantitative theory of confinement:the Poynting vector of the color field should translateinto Poynting vector of the hadron matter practicallyundamaged.
2.3.9 ConclusionsThere are a number of pQCD-related stories I have leftuntold.
Why did it take almost 20 years for the inclusiveenergy–energy correlation ine+e− →h1h2X, believedto be the most reliable IRCS pQCD prediction, to agreewith the experimental data?Why did the discovery of angular ordering - so im-portant for understanding the coherent nature of par-ticle production - remain unpublished for a long time?What would make you submit toPhys. Lett. an ar-ticle under thewrong title [235]?How is it that a specific jet shape distribution turnsout to benarrower than that of the underlying partonensemble, in spite of usual smearing at the hadroniza-tion stage?How tragic was a misprint in Ref. [236]?I am confident that by the timeQCD-60 gets pub-lished, there will be many more pQCD success storiesto tell, in addition to anecdotes.3.1 Lattice determination of αs and quark masses 393 Fundamental constantsConveners:Eberhard Klempt and Giulia ZanderighiThe fundamental constants of QCD are the strong cou-pling gs or αs = g2s4π, and the six quark masses. Usinglattice QCD (LQCD), Sec. 3.1 reviews how these pa-rameters are defined and renormalized, and describesbriefly what measurements are compared with latticepredictions in order to determine the values of thesefundamental parameters. Section 3.2 reviews recent de-terminations ofαs and discusses systematic uncertain-tiesandtheprocedureusedbythecurrentParticleDataGroup (PDG) to obtain the world average value ofαs.
A precise knowledge of this coupling constant is neededto predict any background process in high-energy col-lisions. and to achieve precision in the calculation ofsignal processes.
Some may prefer to read Sec. 3.1 after the discus-sion of LQCD (in Sec. 4) and Sec. 3.2 after discussionof the measurements presented in Sec. 12. The editorsdecided to place these early in the volume in order toemphasize that the size ofαs(Q2) at lowQ2 means thatperturbation theory cannot work at the modest valuesof Q2 characteristic of matter in its ground state. Nonperturbative methods will be required.
3.1 Lattice determination of αs and quarkmassesLuigi Del Debbio and Alberto RamosLatticeQCDprovidesafirst-principles,non-perturbati-ve description of the strong interaction in the StandardModel (see section 4.1). Current state of the art sim-ulations include sea quark effects, electromagnetic in-teractions, and isospin breaking, yielding accurate pre-dictions for low-energy hadronic quantities that are notaccessible in perturbation theory.
By discretizing space-time in a cubic lattice withspacinga, lattice QCD provides a non-perturbative reg-ularization of QCD. Moreover this formulation is ame-nabletonumericalsimulationsusingMonteCarlometh-ods. A key ingredient in any lattice calculation consistsin removing the regulator (i.e. taking the continuumlimit a →0). This requires to tune the bare parame-ters of the lattice QCD action (nf bare quark massesin lattice unitsami, and the bare couplingg0) in orderto reproduce some hadronic input. Note that since theinput of any simulation are dimensionless quantities,only dimensionless predictions can be made. Typicallyone uses meson masses (π,K and D in case that thesimulation includes the charm quark) in units of a ref-erence hadronic quantity to fix the values of the barequark masses. The reference quantity, usually the massof the omega baryonMΩ or theπ/K meson decay con-stants fπ,fK is the quantity used toset the scale : alldimensionless predictions are computed in units of thisreference scale. This tuning of the bare parameters infavor of physical observables constitutes therenormal-ization of the theory. Once this process is carried outone can make solid predictions for many other hadronicquantities, and also determine the values of the funda-mental parameters of QCD. All in all, quark massesare computed in units of the reference scale. The run-ning of the strong coupling is also computed at energyscales measured in units of the same reference scale.
Using as input the experimental value of this referencescale (MΩ, fπ, fK or any other convenient choice), onecan quote physical Dimension-full predictions8. In thisway Lattice QCD is able to connect the experimentallyobserved hadron spectrum (meson and baryon masses)with the fundamental quark masses and strong cou-pling.
Here we address conceptually how the fundamentalparameters of QCD are extracted from Lattice QCDcomputations, and what are the dominating sources ofuncertainty. We will also comment on a few recent re-sults. For a detailed overview on lattice determinationsof the strong coupling, we point the reader to the recentreview [237]. An exhaustive and critical list of latticedeterminations both of quark masses and the strongcoupling is available in the excellent FLAG review [63].
3.1.1 The scale of the strong interactionsItisconvenienttoframethedeterminationofthestrongcoupling constant as a determination of the intrinsicscale of QCD. We start from an observableP that de-pends on a single scaleµ(i.e.P(µ)). Ideally this observ-able should be easy to determine from numerical latticesimulations and with a known perturbative expansion.
As we will see later there are several possibilities. Oncean observable is chosen, it can be used to define a renor-malization scheme (renormalized coupling) via¯g2s(µ) ∝P(µ) , (3.1.1)where the proportionality factor (a simple normaliza-tion) is determined by the condition¯g2s(µ)µ→∞∼ ¯g2MS(µ) (3.1.2)8 The interested reader can consult the section on scale set-ting in the review [237] and in the 2021 FLAG document [63]for a more detailed discussion.40 3 FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTSwith ¯g2MS(µ) ≡(4π)αMS(µ). It is convenient to workin mass independent renormalization schemes (i.e. theobservable P(µ) is defined in the chiral limitmq = 0 ).
In these schemes the energy dependence of the coupling¯gs(µ) is described by the renormalization group (RG)function that has a known perturbative expansionβs(¯g) = µ ddµ¯gs(µ)¯g→0∼ −¯g3s∞∑k=0bk¯g2ks , (3.1.3)where the first two perturbative coefficientsb0 = 1(4π)2(11 −2nf3), (3.1.4a)b1 = 1(4π)4(102 −38nf3), (3.1.4b)nf is the number of fermions in the fundamental repre-sentation(i.e. quarks).Differentrenormalizationschemesare related perturbatively by¯g2s′(µ)¯gs→0∼ ¯g2s(µ) + css′ ¯g4s(µ) + ... . (3.1.5)It is easy to check that the first two coefficients of theβ-function eq. (3.1.4) are invariant under such changesof scheme (i.e. they arescheme independent ).
Integrating the evolution equation (3.1.3) yieldslog µ1µ2=∫ ¯g2¯g1dxβs(x) , (3.1.6)where ¯g1 = ¯gs(µ1) and ¯g1 = ¯gs(µ1). The integral canbe rewritten as∫ ¯g2¯g1dxβs(x) = 12b0(1¯g21− 1¯g22)+ b1b20log ¯g1¯g2+∫ ¯g2¯g1dx[ 1βs(x) + 1b0x3 − b1b20x].
(3.1.7)Note that given the asymptotic form of theβs function(eq. (3.1.3)), the original integral in eq. (3.1.6) is diver-gent when either¯g1 →0 or ¯g2 →0. On the other handthe integral in eq. (3.1.7) is finite in these limits (cf. theintegrand isO(x)). This observation allows us to splitthe integral in eq. (3.1.7) as∫¯g2¯g1=∫0¯g1+∫¯g20 and writeeq. (3.1.6) in the following waylog µ1− 12b0¯g21−b1b20log ¯g1 (3.1.8)+∫ ¯g10dx[ 1βs(x) + 1b0x3 − b1b20x]= (3.1.9)log µ2− 12b0¯g22−b1b20log ¯g2 (3.1.10)+∫ ¯g20dx[ 1βs(x) + 1b0x3 − b1b20x]. (3.1.11)Note that this last equation claims that a function ofµ1 (the left hand side) is equal to a function ofµ2 (theright hand side). The only solution is that both areconstant. The constant is defined to belog Λs and wecan writeΛs =µ[b0¯g2s(µ)]− b12b20 e− 12b0¯g2s(µ) ×exp{−∫ ¯g(µ)0dx[ 1βs(x) + 1b0x3 − b1b20x]}.
(3.1.12)Note that the integration of the renormalization groupequation here is exact, valid beyond perturbation the-ory.Thecombinationontheright-handsideofEq. 3.1.12has units of mass, and is independent ofµ. It is calledthe Λ-parameter and can be understood as theintrin-sic scale of QCD. It is a free parameter, which providesa boundary condition for the evolution equation of thecoupling.
Determining Λis equivalent to determining the cou-pling constant. It is customary to report the value ofαs(M2Z) in the MS scheme, however the latter can beused together with the perturbative expansion of thebeta function to compute theΛ-parameter. While thetwo pictures are clearly equivalent, there are some ad-vantages in focussing onΛas the main character of ourstory:– It makes clear that the determination of the strongcoupling constant really amounts to the determina-tion of one energy scale.
– Although the Λ-parameter depends on the renor-malization scheme. The relation betweenΛ-parame-ters in two different schemes is exactly given by aone-loop computation. In order to see this we recallthat by convention couplings in different schemesare normalized so that they agree to leading order(cf. Eq. (3.1.2)). This implies that renormalized cou-plings in two schemessand s′ are related perturba-tively by¯g2s′(µ)¯gs→0∼ ¯g2s(µ) + css′ ¯g4s(µ) + ... , (3.1.13)with css′ a finite number. This implies that the re-lationΛs′Λs= exp(−css′2b0)(3.1.14)is exact.
– TheΛ-parameterisdefinednon-perturbatively.Evenforschemesthatareintrinsicallydefinedinapertur-bative context:MS is a “perturbative scheme”, butΛMS is a meaningful quantity beyond perturbationtheory thanks to Eq. (3.1.14).3.1 Lattice determination of αs and quark masses 41– Even if the actual precision in the determinationof the strong coupling looks impressive (≈0.7%),this amounts to a determination of theΛ-parameterwith approximately a 4% uncertainty. In particularsome sub-percent effects (QED and isospin breakingcorrections) are subdominant for lattice extractionsof the strong coupling.
3.1.2 Challenges in extractions of the strong cou-plingThe extraction of theΛ-parameter in units of a well de-termined hadronic scaleµhad (like the proton mass) viaEq. (3.1.12) requires the knowledge of theβ-function inthe scheme of choice,βs(x), for valuesx∈[0,gs(µhad)].
Although in principle Lattice QCD can determine therunning ofgs(µ) at any energy scale (it is just the scaledependence of the observableO(µ) in Eq. (3.1.1)), com-putational constraints impose that a typical lattice sim-ulation can only resolve a certain range of scales. Inparticular if we want to describe hadronic physics, wecan reach at most scales µPT ∼ 2 −5 GeV (see fig-ure 3.1.1). For this reason, any lattice QCD extractionof the strong coupling uses the perturbative expansionO(µ) = ∑nPTk=0 ckαkMS(µ) + O(αn+1MS (µ)) + O(Λpµp),(3.1.15)The known perturbative coefficientsci(i= 1,...,n PT)together with the known 5-loop running of the betafunction allow us to estimate the high-energy contribu-tion∫ ¯g(µPT)0dx[ 1βs(x) + 1b0x3 − b1b20x], (3.1.16)to ΛMS. It is worthwhile to emphasize a few subtletiesinvolved in this procedure. Since we only know a fewterms in the perturbative expansion of the observable,the missing higher orders are a source of systematic er-ror in the determination ofΛ. In fact it easy to convinceoneself that it introduces uncertainties of orderO(¯g2nPT (µPT)) . (3.1.17)A further source of systematic error comes from non-perturbative(powercorrections)totheperturbativeex-pansion. These corrections are suppressed asO(Λpµp).
Both sources of systematic effect can be eliminated byjust pushingµPT to a high enough scale, but with dataonly available in a limited range of energies it is chal-lenging to estimate the size of these corrections. More-over,theperturbativecorrections O(αnPT+1MS (µ)) decreasevery slowly (i.e. logarithmically) with the scale µPT.
This makes reducing perturbative uncertainties anex-ponentially difficult problem.
The window problemThe need to use low energies to determine theΛparam-eter in terms of a known, precise, hadronic input, is atodds with the need to reach large energy scales whereperturbation theory is applicable with high enough ac-curacy. This is usually referred as the window problem.
In practice scales of a few GeV are reached and the es-timates of perturbative uncertainties remain the mainsource of error in most lattice calculatrions. Ref. [237]estimates that perturbative uncertainties alone amountto about 1-2% error in αs(MZ) for any method thatsuffers from the window problem.
Dedicated approachesThere exists however a known solution to overcome thisintrinsic difficulty, and it comes under the name of fi-nite size scaling [238]. The idea consists in decouplingthe simulations where the hadronic input is determinedand the simulations used to the determination of therunning of the coupling. Each simulation can only re-solvea limitedrange ofscales, buta recursiveprocedurecalled finite size scaling allows us to relate the energyscales resolved in different simulations (see below formore details). Another recent proposal [239] does notprovide a complete solution to the window problem,but reduces substantially the problem. In particular inthis approach we are only concerned with power correc-tions, that decrease much faster with the energy scalethan perturbative ones.
3.1.3 Lattice observablesThere is a wide variety of lattice observables that areused for a determination of the strong coupling. Thisrich landscape allows for multiple independent determi-nations, providing a robust cross-check of the method-ologies. Here we want to emphasise the broad range ofobservables. For a full review and combination of theresults we refer the reader to Refs. [237] and [63].
We first review the dedicated strategies that aim atsolving (or ameliorating) the window problem with adedicated approach. Typically they require dedicatedsimulations and the uncertainties are statistically dom-inated.
Finite size scaling.
An ingenious solution to the window problem is ob-tained by separating the RG evolution, resolving onlya limited range of scales in each single simulation, and42 3 FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTSαs≈0.30αs≈0.20αs≈0.15αs≈0.100.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000µ/GeVΛ−1IR ∼L Λ−1UV∼a0.00010.0010.010.1110100µ−1/fmFig. 3.1.1 Any quantity determined in a lattice simulation must be determined at energy scales between the intrinsic UV (a fewGeV) and IR (a few dozen MeV) cutoffs of the simulation, given by the total volume and lattice spacing respectively.
adopting a recursive procedure to connect different sim-ulations. The main idea is to use a finite-volume renor-malization scheme, where the renormalization scale isidentified with the inverse volume of the lattice. Therenormalized coupling, denoted here as¯g2SF(µ), (µ= 1/L) , (3.1.18)is extracted from observables computed in Monte Carlosimulations. The running of the coupling is encoded inthe so-calledstep scaling function,σs(u) = ¯g2(µ)⏐⏐⏐¯g2(µ/s)=u, (µ= 1/L) , (3.1.19)which yields the value of the renormalized coupling atthe scaleµ as a function of its value at the scaleµ/s,wheres a scaling factor. The step scaling function isevaluated numerically by computing¯g2SF(µ) on pairsof lattices of sizeL andsL. Thereby multiple sim-ulations on physical volumes much smaller than thetypical hadronic scales are used to compute the non-perturbative evolution of the coupling from a hadronicscaleµhad up to a high-energy scale,µPT, where thematching with perturbation theory is fully under con-trol.Whilethesevolumesaretoosmalltostudyhadronicphysics,theyareperfectlysuitabletostudytheRGflowof the coupling. The only experimental input needed inthis procedure isone dimensionful quantity that needsto be compared to one lattice measurement in a largevolume in order to set the scale in physical units. It isinteresting to remark that the strong coupling constantin this approach is determined from justone experi-mental dimensionful quantity. Perturbation theory isonly used at scales larger than the perturbative scale,µPT = snµhad. This scale can be made (almost) arbi-trarily large with a modest (but dedicated) computa-tional effort (typicallyµPT ∼100 GeV). Finally it isworthwhile to emphasise that for the determinationsbased on finite size methods, the main source of uncer-tainty is statistical rather than systematic. Dedicatedsimulations will allow further improvements.
Heavy quark decouplingRecently a new way to ameliorate the window problemhas been proposed [239] (see also the review [240]). Itis well known that the QCD coupling withnl mass-less quarks andnh heavy quarks (with massM ≫Λ),can be matched using perturbation theory to the cou-pling of QCD withnl massless quarks. This matchingis done in perturbation theory to high order and theperturbative and non-perturbative corrections are verysmall. These perturbative decoupling relations can alsobe understood as relations between theΛ parameterswithnl+nh flavors and theΛparameter withnl flavorsΛ(nl)Λ(nl+nh) = Pnl,nl+nh(M/Λ) . (3.1.20)Both perturbative and non-perturbative uncertaintiesare very small in these relations even for quark massesof the order of the charm[241].
The main point of this new proposal consists in sim-ulatingnf fictitious heavy quarks. Since all quarks areheavy, a coupling computed in this setup¯g(nf)(µ,M) is,up to heavy mass corrections just a pure gauge coupling¯g(nf)(µ,M)g(0)(µ)Λ/M→0∼ 1 + O(M−2) , (3.1.21)whereO(M−2) representcorrectionsthatcanbe(M/µ)2or(M/Λ)2. Conversely we can declare that both cou-plings are the same at slightly diferent values of thescale¯g(nf)(µ(nf),M) = g(0)(µ(0)) , (3.1.22)implying the relation between scalesµ(nf)µ(0)Λ/M→0∼ 1 + O(M−2) . (3.1.23)Together with the basic definition of theΛ parameterEq. (3.1.12), this last relation allows immediately towrite a relation betweenΛ parametersΛ(0)µ(0)Λ/M→0∼ P0,nf(M/Λ)Λ(nf)µ(nf) + O(M−2) (3.1.24)3.1 Lattice determination of αs and quark masses 43This strategy allows us to determine thenf-flavorΛ-parameter from the pure gauge one. One only needsthe values of a massive coupling with either three orfour flavors in order to apply the matching conditionEq. (3.1.22), and the pure gaugeΛ-parameterΛ(nf) = limM→∞µ(nf)P0,nf(M/Λ) ×Λ(0)µ(0) (3.1.25)The limit of infinite mass ensures that all corrections(bothperturbativeandpowercorrections)vanish,whichmakes this an exact relation.
Although this strategy does not completely solvethe window problem, the slowly decreasing perturba-tive uncertainties are only present in the pure gaugedetermination ofΛ(0)µ(0) . Note that the pure gauge theoryis much more tractable: simulations are much cheaper,algorithms are better, and the step scaling strategy ismuch more straightforward. Perturbative uncertaintiesin the decoupling of heavy quarks are negligible, andonly the power correctionsO(M−2) have to be dealtwith. A recent publication [242], using quarks in therange 2-12 GeV shows that precise results can be ob-tained with this strategy. The uncertainty is still dom-inated by statistical uncertainties, and in fact a sub-stantial part of it comes from the pure gauge running,which can be further reduced.
Now we move to strategies that suffer from the win-dow problem described above. In all these methods theuncertainties are dominated typically by the uncertain-ties associated with the truncation of the perturbativeexpansion Eq. (3.1.15), or the cutoff effects arising fromthe difficulty in performing a continuum extrapolationfor quantities defined at scales of a few lattice spacing.
Ghost-ghost-gluon vertexThe QCD vertices are computed numerically and com-pared to their perturbative expansion. As the field cor-relators involved are not gauge-invariant, these calcu-lations require a gauge-fixing procedure, which has po-tential extra uncertainties due to Gribov copies. Non-perturbative corrections and lattice cutoff effects aresizeable in the regime of current simulations.
Static potentialThe interaction between static quarks is known to highorders in perturbation theory, and the data seems tofollow to perturbative prediction down to scales of theorder of 1.5 GeV. The main drawback comes from thefact that the observable is not IR-safe, which leads tothe resummation of soft and ultra-soft divergences, andhencetheintroductionofanextrasoftscaleintheprob-lem.
Heavy-quark correlatorsThe pseudoscalar density correlators are defined asG(x0) = a6(am0)2 ∑x⟨ψγ5ψ(x,x0) ψγ5ψ(0,0)⟩.
(3.1.26)Note that after summing over all spatial sites on theright-hand side, the correlator only depends onx0. Thenormalization is fixed by multiplying the field correla-tor by the factora6(am0)2. Their moments have a well-defined perturbative expansion in powers of the strongcoupling constant. These correlators are computed inlattice simulations, which yield a good statistical pre-cision on the final result. The main drawback of thisapproach is the large cutoff effects that affect the quan-tities used. It is indeed very challenging to explore en-ergy scales larger than the physical charm quark massmc ∼1.4 GeV, which is not clearly in the perturbativeregime. The recent work in Ref. [243] explores differentenergy scales in the range¯mc−3 ¯mc, but the continuumextrapolation is very challenging already atµ≳ 2mc.
Wilson loopsThe expectation values of Wilson loops of multiple sizesm×nare computed at the scale of the lattice cutoff1/a.
While these quantities are not extrapolated to theircontinuum limit, they can be computed in bare latticeperturbation theory. The perturbative series can thenbe tranlsated into an expansion in the remormalizedcouplingαMS(µ).Thetypicalscalefortheseobservablesis µ ∼1/a. Unfortunately the known perturbative or-ders are not sufficient to describe the data and severalcoefficients of the expansion need to be fitted. While thestatistical uncertainty of these determinations is excel-lent, they are plagued by the systematic errors due tothe perturbative truncation.
Hadron Vacuum Polarization (HVP)The strong coupling constant can be extracted from thecorrelators of vector and axial vector currents:Vaµ(x) = ¯ψaγµψa(x) ,Aaµ(x) = ¯ψaγ5γµψa(x) ,afteradecompositioninFourierspace(with Jµ = Vµ,Aµ)∫d4xeıpx⟨Jaµ(x)Jaν(0)⟩== (δµνp2 −pµpν)Π(1)J (p2) −pµpνΠ(0)J (p2) .
The quantityΠ(p2) == Π(0)V (p2) + Π(1)V (p2) + Π(0)A (p2) + Π(1)A (p2)44 3 FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTSis dimensionless and has a perturbative expansionΠ(p2)p→∞∼ c0 +4∑k=1ck(s)αkMS(µ) + O(α5MS) ,(s= p/µ)known up to 5-loops. The constant termc0(s) is diver-gent, so that the strong coupling is usually extractedfrom the differenceΠ(p2) −Π(p2ref), or the Adler func-tionD(p2) = p2 dΠ(p2)dp2 . (3.1.27)The main issue with extractions based on the HVP isthat power corrections are significant even for large mo-menta[244].Ref.[ 245]pushesthedeterminationtohighenergies, so that the data can be described without anypower corrections, but then cutoff effects become largerand the window of scales to obtain the strong couplingdecreases.
Dirac Spectral DensityThe density of the eigenvalues of the Dirac operator,ρ(λ) = 1V⟨∑k[δ(λ−ıλk) + δ(λ+ ıλk)]⟩, (3.1.28)has recently been used to determine the strong couplingvia its perturbative expansionρ(λ) = 3λ34π2(1 −ρ1(s)αMS(µ) −ρ2(s)α2MS(µ)−ρ3(s)α3MS(µ) + O(α4MS)),(s= µ/λ) .
The extraction of the spectral density is usually per-formed at very low energy scales in order to keep thediscretization effects under control. Recent work [246]imposes a cutaλ <0.5 in order to avoid a substantialdeviation from the continuum result. This restricts theenergy scales that can be reached with their data-set(with lattice spacings a−1 = 2 .5,3.6 and 4.5 GeV) toλ< 1.2 GeV.
3.1.4 Determinations of the quark massesBecause of confinement, only color-neutral states areobservedasphysicalstatesandthereforethequarkmassescannot be measured directly in experiments. On theother hand lattice QCD offers a unique opportunity todetermine these quantities. In fact thenf bare quarkmasses appearing as parameters in the lattice QCD ac-tion have to be tuned using nf physical observablesin order to make any meaningful prediction. Once thistuning is performed, we only need to renormalize itsvalues to some convenient scheme. The scale depen-dence of renormalized values for quark masses in mass-independent renormalization schemes is described bythe mass anomalous dimension, γ(¯g), which only de-pends on the gauge coupling and obeys the RG equa-tionµ ddµ¯mi(µ) = γ(¯g) ¯mi(µ)¯g→0∼ −¯g2∞∑k=0dk¯g2k, (3.1.29)where the leading perturbative coefficientd0 = 1(4π)2(11 −2nf3)(3.1.30)is scheme-independent. As for the coupling, the quarkmasses are defined in a given renormalization schemeand at a given renormalization scale; the conventionalpractice is to quote a value for the masses in theMSscheme, ¯mMS(µ) (with µ = 2 GeV for light quarks),but as in the case of the coupling we find more natu-ral to work with renormalization group invariant (RGI)quantities. The evolution equation, Eq. (3.1.29), can beintegrated exactly to yieldMi = ¯mi(µ)(2b0¯g(µ)2)−d0/(2b0)×exp{−∫ ¯g(µ)0dx[γ(x)β(x) − d0b0x]}. (3.1.31)Once again we can think of the RGI massMi as a scale-independent energy that specifies the boundary condi-tion for the mass evolution and hence fully determinethe renormalized mass at all energies. An additionalbenefit of quoting RGI quark masses is that they arescheme independent (and therefore well defined beyondperturbation theory). On the other hand, the deter-mination of RGI quark masses requires the knowledgeof the evolution of the coupling. Given that the cur-rent precision of theΛparameter (about a 4%) is muchlower than the precision of quark masses at low energies(about a 1% precision), the values of quark masses at afew GeV are much more precise than their RGI coun-terparts. Note however that this usually means thatperturbation theory has been used at a few GeV, andall the caveats about the use of perturbation theoryat medium energies raised in the previous section arealso applicable here; the determination of quark massesis also plagued by a window problem. However from apractical point of view, the perturbative uncertaintiesin this case seem to be much better behaved than inthe case of the extractions of the strong coupling.
Nowadays the most precise results available in theFLAG review[63] for light and heavy quark masses are3.1 Lattice determination of αs and quark masses 45obtained in the isosymmetric limit. There are few sub-tleties involved in these extractions; they originate fromthe fact that experimental inputs include QED andisospin-breaking corrections, while these effects are notincluded in the lattice simulations. These effects aresmall but they are relevant at the level of precision ofstate-of-the-art lattice computations. Ideally one wouldlike to subtract the isospin breaking corrections fromthe experimental data. The problem is that electromag-netic interactions affect the RG functions (bothβ(¯g)and τ(¯g)) withO(αEM) contributions: quarks with dif-ferent electric charges (like theuand dquarks) run dif-ferently. QED makes the isospin symmetric point ill de-fined. Even if we impose¯mu(µ) = ¯md(µ) at µ= 2 GeV ,the u and d quarks will be non-degenerate at anothergeneric renormalization scale. Since the subtraction ofisospin breaking corrections depends on the definitionof the isospin symmetric limit, it is clear that there are(small) ambiguities whatever convention one chooses.
The FLAG review [63] contains a detailed discussionboth in the quark mass section and in the scale settingsection about this particular issue, and the reader isencouraged to consult it for more details.
We end this introduction by emphasizing that theinclusion of the leading QED and strong isospin break-ing corrections (including quark loop effects) is an ac-tive area of research in lattice QCD. Results with a firstprinciples description of the standard model at low en-ergies, including QCD, QED and strong isospin break-ing, are rapidly becoming the new standard for latticecomputations where this level of precision is required.
3.1.5 Quark mass definitionsHere we consider the determination of quark massesin QCD alone (i.e. a sensible definition of the isospinsymmetric point has been made). Quark currents playa central role in QCD In particular, the axial currentand pseudo scalar densityAaµ(x) = ¯ψ(x)γµγ5σa2 ψ(x) , (3.1.32)Pa(x) = ¯ψ(x)γ5σa2 ψ(x) , (3.1.33)are expected, in the continuum, to obey the PCAC re-lation∂µAaµ(x) = mPa(x) . (3.1.34)This relation is often used todefine renormalized quarkmasses. The reason is that we expect the same relationto hold in the lattice regularized theory after renormal-ization and up to cutoff effects9. The axial current andpseudo scalar density are renormalized multiplicatively(AR)aµ(x) = ZAAaµ(x) , (3.1.35)(PR)a(x) = ZP(µ)Pa(x) . (3.1.36)Note that the axial current renormalization factor isscale independent. Quark masses are also expected torenormalize multiplicatively ¯m(µ) = Zm(µ)m0, leadingto the lattice version of the PCAC relation∂µAaµ(x) = 2Zm(µ)ZP(µ)ZAm0Pa(x) . (3.1.37)Thisrelationallowstodeterminetherenormalizedquarkmasses via the relation¯m(µ) = Zm(µ)m0 = ZA⟨∂µAaµ(x)Oext⟩ZP(µ)⟨Pa(x)Oext⟩, (3.1.38)with much freedom to choose the probeOext. Note thatthe running of the quark masses is given by the scale-dependentrenormalizationfactor ZP(µ).Therearesev-eral methods to determine it on the lattice. Most recentworks use nonperturbative renormalization schemes.
RI-(S)MOM schemesThese renormalization schemes are conceptually verysimilar to the one used in perturbation theory. Thereexists several possibilities, but all are based on impos-ing a suitable renormalization condition to some Greenfunctions with external momenta playing the role ofthe renormalization scale. In principle the renormaliza-tion scheme is formulated in infinite volume and at zeromass. In this setup the connection with perturbationtheory is known to high accuracy (up to 4-loops), butthis setup cannot be simulated directly on the lattice,so the infinite volume and zero mass limit require a ded-icated study. In particular these methods suffer from awindow problem (the impossibility to keep the volumelarge and at the same time have access to high energyscales where perturbation theory can be trusted).
Finite volume schemesIn this schemes the renormalization condition is im-posed in a finite volume L, which plays the role ofthe renormalization scale (i.e.µ∼1/L). With a smartchoice of boundary conditions one can directly simu-late massless quarks. Contact with perturbation theoryis typically only known up to 2-loops, but using thetechniques of finite size scaling, this matching can beperformed at very high energies (i.e. 100 GeV), whereperturbative uncertainties are negligible.
9 Depending on the type of fermion formulation used andother details, the cutoff effects can beO(a) or O(a2). In prac-tice most lattice determinations nowadays choose to eliminatethe linear effects ina.46 3 FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTSMRGIu MRGId MRGIs MRGIc MRGIb [MeV]Nf = 2 + 1 3.15(13) 6.49(14) 128(2) 1526(17) 6881(63)Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 2.97(11) 6.53(11) 129.7(1.5) 1520(22) 6934(58)Table 3.1.1FLAG averages of the RGI quark masses in MeV for theu,d,s,c and b quarks (see[63]). Several works contributeto these averages [243, 247–266] computed with eitherNf = 2 + 1 and Nf = 2 + 1 + 1 lattice simulations have about a percentprecision for all different quark masses.
3.1.6 Approaches for heavy quarksHeavy quarks are difficult to simulate on the lattice.
The reason is that in order to have discretization errorsunder control, the lattice cutoff a−1 has to be muchlarger than all other scales considered in the problem.
In particular we requiream ≪1. The lattice commu-nityhastypicallydealtwiththisproblemusinganeffec-tive description for the heavy quarks (see for exampleRefs. [267] and [268]). This topic is beyond the scope ofthis review. Here instead we will focus on some recentworks that use a relativistic formulation for the heavyquarks. In particular the recent work [269] uses the ex-pansion of a heavy-light meson massMhl as a functionof the heavy quark pole massmhMhl = mh + ¯Λ+ µπ −µG(mh)2mh+ O(1/m2h) . (3.1.39)Here ¯Λ is the binding energy, µπ/2mh is the kineticenergy and µG(mh) is the hyperfine energy. This re-lation allows to fit meson masses to the heavy quarkpole mass, and therefore to determine it by using theperturbative relationmh ∼¯mMS(1 +∞∑k=0rnαn+1( ¯mMS)). (3.1.40)The problem of this approach is that the pole mass hasa terribly behaved perturbative expansion. In factrn = (2b0)nΓ(n+ 1 + b1/(2b20)) . (3.1.41)Reference [269] uses instead the minimal renormalonsubtraction scheme, that has better PT properties.
Makingalongstoryshort,heavy-lightmesonmassesare related directly to quark masses, without the needofanynon-perturbativerenormalization.Thisapproachis used to determine thebmeson mass. Masses of otherquarks are extracted from appropriate quark mass ra-tios, that do not need the determination of any renor-malization constant.
Ithastobepointedoutthattheheavyquarkmassesused in this work are often of the order of the latticeUV cutoff, i.e.aM ∼1, and that the direct connectionbetween heavy-light meson masses and quark massesdepends on the application of a particular resummedperturbativerelationatrelativelylowenergyscales.De-spite these caveats, it is clear that this work has lookedinto the future by simulating relativistic heavy quarksclose to theb meson mass.
3.1.7 ConclusionsWe conclude this section by summarising briefly thestatus of the determinations of the fundamental param-eters of the SM from lattice QCD.
With the advent of dynamical quark simulationsandnewmethodsfornon-perturbativerenormalization,lattice QCD determinations of the strong coupling andquark masses have become both very accurate and veryprecise. Even if numerical simulations do not qualify asa proof, many of us believe that these computationshave fulfilled the dream of connecting the fundamentalquark masses and strong coupling to the well measuredspectra of hadrons from first principles.
TherearetwochallengesthatlatticeQCDcomputa-tionsfaceinthisgame.Ononehandthestrongcouplingand quark masses are useful when quoted in theMS-scheme, requiring to make contact with perturbationtheory while most lattice simulations are performedto explores hadronic low energy scales. On the otherhand experimental input (hadron masses), have elec-tromagnetic and strong isospin breaking corrections,while most lattice QCD simulations are performed inthe isospin symmetric limit.
The window problemConnecting the perturbative and hadronic regimes ofQCD is hard. These two scales are separated by a largegap in energy scales, due to the logarithmic running ofthe strong coupling with the renormalization scale. It isvery challenging to accommodate these disparate scalesin a single lattice simulation, and if insists on doing so,compromises have to be made and perturbation theoryhas to be used at a few GeV.
Isospin breaking correctionsThe simulation of electromagnetism on the lattice posesits own challenges (see [270] for a review), related with3.2 The strong-interaction coupling constant 47the description of charged states in presence of longrange interactions. The simulation of non-degeneratelight quarks is also numerically challenging. These rea-sons explain that most lattice computations are per-formed in the isospin symmetric limit.
The lattice community has made great progress onthese fronts in recent years. The window problem hasa known solution since the early 90’s: finite size scal-ing[238].Ithasbeenappliedto Nf = 0,2,3,4 QCD[271–273] and to the determination of quark masses [], butthese determinations traditionally produced results forthe strong coupling with large statistical uncertainties.
Thanks to recent developments [274], finite size scal-ing studies can achieve a subpercent level of precisionin the strong coupling [275]. These techniques have alsobeen applied to the determination of quark masses [249,276, 277]. Finite size scaling has been for a long timethe only solution to the window problem, until a newmethod based on decoupling of heavy quarks has beenproposed [239]. This new method largely reduces thewindowproblemandrecentresultsshowthatthestrongcoupling can also be determined using these techniqueswithasub-percentprecision[ 242].Thisstrategyhasnotyet been applied to the determination of quark masses,but the method should also lead to precise determina-tions of the running of quark masses.
With the advent of dynamical fermion simulationsthe precision of lattice determinations of quark masseshas rapidly reached a very mature status. Renormaliza-tion is nowadays performed in a fully non-perturbativeway, and using different strategies. Although contactwith perturbation theory has to be made, and in prin-ciple there is also a window problem present in the ex-traction of quark masses, perturbative uncertainties inthis case seem to be much better behaved than in thecase of extractions of the strong coupling. All in all,at the current level of precision the presence of electro-magnetism and strong isospin in nature is the main fac-tor limiting the precision of many lattice computations.
But the field evolves very quickly and there exist sev-eral lattice computations of the individual light quarkmasses mu,md that directly compute the QED effectsin the quenched approximation. We are convinced thatunquenched results will follow soon, and isospin break-ing corrections will be applied to the determinations ofall quark masses.
Only fifteen years after the first lattice QCD simula-tions with dynamical quarks, lattice QCD has been ableto determine from first principles the strong couplingwith a 0.7% error. Quark masses are determined witha percent error (see Table3.1.1), and soon these com-putations will include full isospin breaking corrections.
The implications of these calculations are far reachingαs(MZ2) = 0.1179 ± 0.0009August 2021αs(Q2)Q [GeV]τ decay (N 3LO)low Q 2 cont. (N 3LO)HERA jets (NNLO)Heavy Quarkonia (NNLO)e+e- jets/shapes (NNLO+res)pp/p-p (jets NLO)EW precision fit (N 3LO)pp (top, NNLO) 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 1 10 100 1000Fig. 3.2.1 Measurements of the coupling constant αs, as afunction of the energy scaleQ. The level of precision of the per-turbative prediction used in the measurement ofαs is indicatedin brackets (NLO: next-to-leading order; NNLO: next-to-next-to-leading order; NNLO+res.: NNLO matched to a resummedcalculation; N3LO: next-to-next-to-leading order. Figure takenfrom Ref. [278].
in constraining the SM description of physical phenom-ena. Lattice determinations ofαs are the most precise(see the next section). The FLAG average based onNf = 2 + 1 + 1 simulations of the u quark mass isMRGIu = 2 .97(11) MeV (based on the works [248, 269],see also [247]). This value disfavors a popular solutionto the strong CP problem (a masslessu quark) by 30standard deviations without any assumptions or modelfor the strong interactions.
3.2 The strong-interaction coupling con-stantGiulia Zanderighi3.2.1 The world average determination of αsWe summarize here the current procedure used in thePDG [278] to obtain the world average value ofαs(M2z)and its uncertainty, and we discuss future prospects forits improvement.
Preliminary considerationsAll observables involving the strong interaction dependon the value of the strong coupling constant. This im-plies that a number of different observables can be used48 3 FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTSto determine the coupling constant, provided that asuitable theoretical prediction is available for that ob-servable. The following considerations are used to as-sess if a particular observable is suitable for use in thedetermination of the strong coupling constant:– The observable’s sensitivity toαs as compared totheexperimentalprecision.Forexample,forthe e+e−cross section to hadrons (e.g. theRratio), QCD ef-fects are only a small correction, since the pertur-bative series starts at orderα0s, but the experimen-tal precision is high. Three-jet production, or eventshapes, in e+e− annihilation are directly sensitiveto αs since they start at orderαs. Four- and five-jetcross-sections start atα2s and α3s respectively, andhence are very sensitive toαs. However, the preci-sionofthemeasurementsdeterioratesasthenumberof jets involved increases.
– Theaccuracyoftheperturbativeprediction,orequiv-alently of the relation betweenαs and the value ofthe observable. The minimal requirement is gener-ally considered to be an NLO prediction. The PDGimposes now that at least NNLO accurate predic-tionsbeavailable.Incertaincaseswherephasespacerestrictionsrequireit,fixed-orderpredictionsaresup-plemented with resummation. An improved pertur-bative accuracy is necessary to guarantee that thetheoretical uncertainty is assessed in a robust way.
– The size of non-perturbative effects. Sufficiently in-clusive quantities, like the e+e− cross section tohadrons, have small non-perturbative contributions∼Λ4/Q4. Other quantities, such as event-shape dis-tributions, typically have contributions∼Λ/Q. Allotheraspectsbeingequivalent,observableswithsmal-ler non-perturbative corrections are preferable.
– The scale at which the measurement is performed.
An uncertaintyδ on a measurement ofαs(Q2), at ascale Q, translates to an uncertaintyδ′ = α2s(M2Z)/α2s(Q2) ×δ on αs(M2Z). For example, this enhancesthe already important impact of precise low-Qmea-surements, such as fromτ decays, in combinationsperformed at theMZ scale.
The PDG determination ofαs first separates mea-surements into a number of different categories, thencalculates an average for each category. This average isthen used as an input to the world average. The PDGprocedure requires:1. a specification of the conditions that a determina-tion ofαs should fulfill in order be included in theaverage;2. a specification of the separations of the different ex-tractions ofαs(M2Z) into the separate categories;3. aspecificationoftheprocedurewithineachcategoryof the procedure to compute the average and itsuncertainty;4. a specification of the manner in which the differentsub-averages and their uncertainties are combinedto determine the final value ofαs(M2Z) and its un-certainty.
Details of the PDG averaging procedureIn the following, we summarize the procedure adoptedin the last edition of the PDG [278]. There, the selectionof results from which to determine the world averagevalue ofαs(M2Z) is restricted to those that satisfy a welldefined set of criteria. These are that the fit should be1. accompanied by reliable estimates of all experimen-tal and theoretical uncertainties;2. basedonthemostcompleteperturbativeQCDpredic-tionsofatleastnext-to-next-toleadingorder(NNLO)accuracy;3. published in a peer-reviewed journal at the time ofwriting of the PDG report.
Note that the second condition to some extent followsfrom the first. In fact, determinations of the strongcoupling from observables in e+e− involving e.g. fiveor more jets are very sensitive toαs, and could pro-vide additional constraints. However, these observablesare currently described only at leading order (LO) ornext-to-leading order (NLO), and the determination ofthe theoretical uncertainty is thus considered not suf-ficiently robust. It is also important to note that somedeterminations are included in the PDG, but the uncer-tainty quoted in the relevant publications is increasedby the PDG authors to fulfill the first condition. Simi-larly, in some cases the central value used in the PDGdiffers from the one quoted in some publications, butcan be extracted from the analysis performed in thatwork.
Categories of observablesAll observables used in the determination ofαs(M2Z)in the PDG averaging procedure are classified in thefollowing categories– “Hadronic τ decays and lowQ2 continuum” (τ de-cays and lowQ2): the coupling constant is here de-termined at theτ mass, therefore once it is evolvedup to theZ mass the uncertainty shrink. Perturba-tive calculations forτ decays are available at N3LO,however there are different approaches to treat theperturbativeandnon-perturbativecontributions,whichresult in significant differences. These discrepanciesare currently the limiting factor in reducing the un-certianty in this category.3.2 The strong-interaction coupling constant 49– “Heavy quarkonia decays” (Q¯Q bound states): cal-culations are available at NNLO and N3LO.
– “PDF fits” (PDF fits): this category include bothglobal PDF fits and analyses of singlet and non-singlet structure functions. To quantify the theoryuncertainty, half of the difference between resultsobtained with NNLO and NLO predictions is addedin quadrature.
– “Hadronic final states ofe+e− annihilations” (e+e−jets & shapes): these fits use measurements at PE-TRAandLEP.Non-perturbativecorrectionsareim-portant, going asΛ/Q and can be estimated eithervia Monte Carlo simulations or analytic modeling.
– “Observablesfromhadron-inducedcollisions”(hadroncolliders): NNLO calculations fort¯t or jet produc-tion at both the LHC and HERA, andZ+jet pro-duction at the LHC have allowed measurements forthese processes to be used inαs determinations. Animportant open question is whether a simultaneousPDF and αs fit has to be carried out in order toavoid a potential bias.
– “Electroweak precision fit” (electroweak):αs deter-minations are averaged from electroweak fits to datafrom the Tevatron, LHC, LEP and the SLC. Thesefits rely on the strict validity of the Standard Model.
– ”Lattice”:theaveragedeterminedbytheFLAGgroupin 2019 [279] from an input of 8 determinations wasused in the last PDG determination; the subsequent2021 αs average is very consistent with that of 2019.
Detailed information about which observables are in-cludedinthedifferentcategoriescanbefoundinRef.[ 278].
Average and uncertainty in each categoryInordertocalculatetheworldaveragevalueof αs(M2Z),a preliminary step of pre-averaging results within theeach category listed in Sec. 3.2.1 is carried out. Foreach sub-field, except for the ”Lattice” category, theunweighted average of all selected results is taken asthe pre-average value ofαs(M2Z), and the unweightedaverage of the quoted uncertainties is assigned to bethe respective overall error of this pre-average. An un-weighted average is used to avoid the situation in whichindividual measurements, which may be in tension withother measurements and may have underestimated un-certainties, can considerably affect the determinationof the strong coupling in a given category. As an ex-ample, the determination of αs(M2Z) from e+e− jets& shapes currently averages ten determinations andarrives at αs(M2Z) = 0 .1171 ±0.0031. Since two de-terminations [280, 281], both based on a similar the-oretical framework, arrive at a small value ofαs(M2Z)and have a very small uncertainty, if one were to per-form a weighted average one would arrive atαs(M2Z)from e+e− jets & shapes ofαs(M2Z) = 0 .1155 ±0.0006,which is not compatible with the current world aver-age. This would, in fact, considerably change the worldaverage because of the very small uncertainties. Thecurrent procedure is instead robust againstαs(M2Z) de-terminations that are outliers with small uncertaintiesas compared to the other determinations in the samecategory. For the “Lattice QCD” (lattice) sub-field, thePDG adopts the LAG2019 average value and uncer-tainty for this sub-field [279]. FLAG2019 also requiresstrict conditions on its own for a determination to beincluded in their average, which are in line with thoseused in the PDG. The results of the averages of thecategories are given in table3.2.1. From the table, itis clear that determinations from different categoriesare compatible with each other and accordingly can becombined to give rise to a final average.
Final averageSince the six sub-fields (excluding lattice) are largelyindependent of each other, the PDG determines a non-lattice world average value using a standard ‘χ2 aver-aging’ method. This result in the final average of thesix categories ofαs(M2Z) = 0 .1175 ±0.0010 , (without lattice) ,(3.2.1)which is fully compatible with the lattice determina-tion. In a last step the PDG performs an unweightedaverage of the values and uncertainties ofαs(M2Z) fromthe non-lattice result and the lattice result presented inthe FLAG2019 report,which results in the final averageofαs(M2Z) = 0 .1179 ±0.0009 , (ﬁnal average). (3.2.2)Performing a weighted average of all seven cate-gories would instead give rise toαs(M2Z) = 0 .1180 ±0.0006. The PDG uncertainty is instead more conser-vative and about 50% larger. These final results aresummarized in Fig.3.2.2.
category αs(M2Z)τ decays and lowQ2 0.1178 ± 0.0019Q¯Qbound states) 0.1181 ± 0.0037PDF fits 0.1162 ± 0.0020e+e− jets & shapes 0.1171 ± 0.0031hadron colliders 0.1165 ± 0.0028electroweak 0.1208 ± 0.0028lattice 0.1182 ± 0.0008Table 3.2.1 PDG average of the categories of observables.
These are the final input to the world average ofαs.50 3 FUNDAMENTAL CONSTANTS0.110 0.115 0.120 0.125 0.130αs(M2Z)August 2021BDP 2008-16Boito 2018PDG 2020Boito 2021τ decays&low Q2Mateu 2018Peset 2018Narison 2018 (c ̄c)Narison 2018 (b ̄b)BM19 (c ̄c)BM20 (b ̄b)QQboundstatesBBG06JR14ABMP16NNPDF31CT18MSHT20PDF fitsALEPH (j&s)OPAL (j&s)JADE (j&s)Dissertori (3j)JADE (3j)Verbytskyi (2j)Kardos (EEC)Abbate (T)Gehrmann (T)Hoang (C) e + e −jets&shapesKlijnsma (t ̄t)CMS (t ̄t)H1 (jets)\*d'Enterria (W/Z)HERA (jets)hadroncolliderPDG 2020Gfitter 2018 electroweakFLAG2019 latticeFig. 3.2.2 Summary of the determinations ofαs(M2Z) fromthe seven sub-fields used in the PDG [278], as discussed in thetext. The yellow (light shaded) bands and dotted lines indi-cate the pre-average values of each sub-field. The dashed lineand blue (dark shaded) band represent the final world averagevalue ofαs(M2Z). The ’\*’ symbol within the “hadron colliders”sub-field indicates a determination including a simultaneous fitof parton distribution functions. All other “hadron collider” de-terminations instead use a set of parton distribution functionas input to the fit. Figure taken from Ref. [278].
3.2.2 OutlookDespite the numerous determinations of the strong cou-pling constant, it remains to date the least well-knowngaugecoupling,withanuncertaintyofabout1%.Stillitis a remarkable success that all determinations from allcategories agree well with each other, all within aboutone sigma. Future improvements are likely to be drivenby those categories which today have the smallest un-certainties, i.e. lattice determinations,τ decays and lowQ2 measurements.
As far as the category “τ decays and lowQ2 mea-surements” are concerned, it is important to mentionthat the uncertainty quoted in the latter category in-cludes the difference in the extractions that are ob-tainedusingcontourimprovedperturbationtheory(CIPT)and fixed order perturbation theory (FOPT). Recentarguments suggest that FOPT are to be preferred, seealso dedicated discussions on this point in Ref. [282]. Ifthis is confirmed, the value ofαs(M2Z) in this categorywould shift slightly to lower values, and would allow oneto quote a reduced theoretical uncertainty since this ad-ditional source of uncertainty would be completely re-moved. Further improvements could also come from abetter understanding of non-perturbative effects.
Important progress is also expected in the category“e+e− jets & shapes”, where the calculation of powercorrections in the 3-jet region [161, 283] could have asizeable impact, and improve fits of the coupling fromevent shapes. In fact, in current determinations thatrely on an analytic computation of non-perturbativepower corrections, these calculations are performed inthe two-jet limit and applied to the kinematic regionused in the fits where events typically have an addi-tional hard emission, i.e. to three-jet configurations. Atreatment of these corrections in the three-jet regionis now possible, at least for some observables and theimpact of this improved treatment of non-perturbativeeffects onαs(M2Z) in this category is eagerly awaited.
As far as the hadron collider category is concerned,it is an open question if it is always preferred to fitαs(M2Z) and the parton distribution functions simul-taneously and how to best deal with correlations be-tween the parton distribution function parameters andαs(M2Z) in the cases where the fit is not performed si-multaneously. In view of many more NNLO results tocomeandmanymoredatafromtheLHC,wecanexpecttheoretical work and advances in addressing this ques-tion. Ratios of cross sections are less sensitive to partondistributionfunctionsandthereforecouldbeconsideredmore suitable to extractαs. For instance, NNLO pre-dictions for 3-jet production will enable to perform fitsof αs(M2Z) from ratios with at least partial cancellationof some uncertainties. It is not clear whether this reduc-tion in uncertainty also holds for the PDF dependenceof such ratio predictions. Moreover, for predictions ofratios of cross sections, the natural central scale choicein numerator and denominator are in general not thesame. Data from the “hadron collider category” at highQ2 will also be crucial to test the running of the cou-pling to highest energy scales. Such tests are importantsince heavy states that couple strongly could modifythe running ofαs at highQ2.