9.1 Theoretical overview of the baryon spectrum 309the techniques that have been developed for under-standingquarkoniawillbedirectlyapplicable.Thisholdsfor example for studies of pairs of heavy dark matter inthe evolution in the early universe, that well match thestudies of the nonequilibrium evolution of quarkoniumin medium, or for the production and the spectroscopyof heavy particles of BSM.
9 BaryonsConveners:V olker Burkert and F ranz GrossAs we are trying to make progress in the complex worldof physical sciences, we should not lose sight of whatphysics is all about: understanding the origin and thehistory of our universe, and the laws underlying theobservations. In this section we also address how ex-cited states of the nucleon fit in to our understandingof the forces and the dynamics of matter in the historyof the universe. On the internet we find beautiful rep-resentations of the phases through which the universeevolved from the Big Bang (BB) to our times as shownin Fig.9.0.1.
Fig. 9.0.1 The evolution of the Universe. The line denotedas Quark-hadron transition, is where protons and neutrons areformed.
Existing electron accelerators as CEBAF, ELSA,and MAMI, and colliders as BES III have sufficient en-ergy reach to access this region and study processes inisolation that occurred during this transition in the mi-crosecond old universe and resulted in the freeze outof baryons. There are some marked events that havebeenofparticularsignificanceduringtheearlyphasesofthe its history, such as the quark-gluon plasma of non-interacting colored quarks and gluons, and the formingof protons and neutrons. During this transition dra-matic events occur - chiral symmetry is broken, quarksacquiremassdynamically,baryonresonancesoccurabun-dantly, and colored quarks and gluons are confined.
Thiscrossoverprocessisgovernedbytheexcitedhadrons.
During this period strong QCD (sQCD) emerges as theprocess describing the interaction of colored quarks andgluons.
Thesearethephenomenathatweareexploringwithelectron and hadron accelerators - the full discovery ofthe baryon (and meson) spectrum, the role of chiralsymmetry breaking and the generation of dynamicalquark mass in confinement. While we can not recreatethe exact condition in the laboratory, with existing ac-celerators we can explore these processes in isolation.
With electron machines and high energy photon beamsin the few GeV energy range we search for undiscoveredexcitation of nucleons and other baryons.
In this section, Capstick and Crede give an overviewover the spectrum of light-quark baryons, followed bya review o the present experimental status by Burk-ert, Klempt and Thoma. The structure of baryon res-onances is explored in electroproduction experiments(Burkert). The section ends with a review of baryonswith heavy quarks.
9.1 Theoretical overview of the baryonspectrumSimon Capstick and V olker Crede9.1.1 OverviewThiscontributionexaminestheconstraintsonthebaryonspectrum imposed by general considerations of flavor,rotational, parity, and particle-exchange symmetries,whichleadtoaclassificationschemeforexcitedbaryons.
Theoretical approaches to a description of the baryonspectrum based on constituent quark models with vari-ous methods for treating the short-range range interac-tions between quarks are described, and are contrastedto investigations of the spectrum based on lattice andDyson-Schwinger equation approaches to QCD. Mod-els predict more excited states than are present in thespectrum extracted from data; considerations of howthese missing states decay point to alternative ways toproduce them, and how to detect their presence onceproduced. Finally, hybrid baryons with explicit gluonicexcitations and the prospect for their discovery are dis-cussed. More detail is given in, for example, reviews310 9 BARYONSof the theoretical approach to the baryon spectrum inRefs. [2656–2658], and reviews of recent experimentaldevelopments in Refs. [2659, 2660].
9.1.2 Symmetry , group theory , and constraintson the baryon spectrumExchange symmetry, baryons, and the color degrees offreedomThe development ofSU(3)f and its isospin subgroup inorder to understand the proliferation of what are nowknown as ground-state baryons led to an understand-ing that there are states with flavor wave functions thatare totally symmetric under exchange of up and downquarks, which are identical in the isospin-symmetriclimit. An example is the isospin-3/2 baryon,∆, withthe four charge states ∆++, ∆+, ∆0, and ∆−, threeof which were discovered in earlyπN elastic scatteringexperiments with charged pion beams, and shown byexamining their strong decays to have spin and parityJP = 3 /2+. This led to a paradox: Ground states offew-body systems made up of identical particles usu-ally have spatial wave functions with orbital angularmomentum and parity LP = 0 +, and are exchangesymmetric. This implies a total quark spinS = 3 /2,which is also totally symmetric under exchange of thespin-1/2 quarks. However, as fermions, the Pauli prin-ciple requires that the wave function of these baryonsin the product flavor, spatial, and spin space is totallyantisymmetric.
The solution is to assign to the quarks an additionaldegree of freedom, and a wave function in this degree offreedom which is totally antisymmetric under exchangeof the quarks. The simplest way to do this is with athree-valued degree of freedom, now called color. QCDwas developed when it was realized that this would re-sult from an SU(3)c symmetry, where the strong in-teractions are independent of rotations of the quarksin the color space, with baryons as automatically to-tally antisymmetric color singlets. This naturally led toa gauge theory which could be the basis for the stronginteractions between quarks, and by extension, betweenall hadrons.
Flavor symmetry in baryonsThereisanapproximate SU(3)f symmetryofthestronginteractions under exchange of the quarksu, d, and s,whichisbrokenbythehighermassofthestrangequark.
Gell-Mann [1564] and Okubo [15] were able to write amass formula for ground-state decuplet(JP = 3 /2+),shown in Fig. 9.1.1, and separately for octet (JP =1/2+) baryons, shown in Fig. 9.1.2, in terms of theeigenvalues of the two generators of the Lie algebra ofFig. 9.1.1The ground-state baryon decuplet, with strangeness(Y − B) plottedvs. the third component of isospinI3.
Fig. 9.1.2 The ground-state baryon octet, with strangenessplotted vs. the third component of isospin.
SU(3)f that can be simultaneously diagonalized. Thesegenerators are the third component of isospinI3, andthe hyperchargeY = B+S, whereB is baryon numberand S is strangeness (S = −1 for a strange quark, forhistorical reasons). Hypercharge is represented by thediagonal matrix(1,1,−2) in the{u,d,s }flavor space.
TheGell-Mann-Okubomassformulaascribesthebreak-ing of symmetry in hadrons to differences in the hyper-charge, now understood to be due to the larger massof the strange quark. It is realized in the ground-stateoctet baryons as(MN + MΞ)/2 = (3 MΛ + MΣ)/4,which holds to a fraction of a percent accuracy, and inground-state decuplet baryons as the equal-spacing ruleM∗Σ −M∆ = M∗Ξ −M∗Σ = MΩ −M∗Ξ,9.1 Theoretical overview of the baryon spectrum 311each approximately 147 MeV, which can be thought ofas the difference in the strange and average light(u,d)quark masses. The latter led to the prediction by Gell-Mann [2661] of the existence at around 1680 MeV of thedecuplet Ω baryon, made up of three strange quarks.
Although the formula is phenomenological, it is nowunderstood in the context of chiral perturbation theory.
De Rujula, Georgi and Glashow [728] were able toexplain the above results in the context of a modelof hadrons which confined the quarks with a flavorand spin-independent interaction, and used a short-distance interaction between the quarks that resultsfrom asymptotic freedom. This is the result of one-gluon exchange, and led to a short-distance potentialbetween two quarks that was Coulomb in nature, andcould be interpreted of as due to interactions betweentwo colored spin-1/2 quarks. The mass dependence ofthe color-magnetic moments of the quarks led naturallyto spin- and flavor-dependent interactions between thequarks, whichcould also explain the mass differences between octetand decuplet baryons of the same flavor, and allow aqualitative understanding of the sign and size of thedifference Σ0 −Λ0 between the masses of theI = 1 andI = 0 neutral strange baryons.
Oneconsequenceofthissimple(additive)quarkmo-del description of baryons is an understanding of themagnetic moments of the nucleonsp,n and other octetanddecupletground-statebaryons.Usingthetotalquark-spin S = 1/2 wave function and octet flavor wave func-tions for the three quarks in nucleons yieldsµp = 43µu −13µd,and, since the proton can be turned into the neutronby the transformationu↔d, we haveµn = 43µd −13µu.
Fitting this to the measured moments gives quark mag-netic moments in the ratio of the quark charges to agood approximation, if we assume the quark masses areidentical, and that this light quark mass is around onethird of the mass of nucleons. This approach also leadstoaqualitativeunderstandingofthemagneticmomentsof other ground-state octet and decuplet baryons, andthe transition moment that affects the rate of the decayΣ0 →Λ0γ. Isgur and Karl [2662] added small contri-butions to baryon magnetic moments, due to configu-ration mixing, relativistic corrections, and violations ofisospin symmetry, to refine these non-relativistic quarkmodel estimates. The result was better agreement withthe moments extracted from experimental data.
Rotational and parity symmetriesIgnoring for now interactions that couple the orbitaland spin angular momenta of the quarks, rotationalsymmetry and the conservation of angular momentumalsoimplythatgroundandexcited-statebaryonsshouldlieinmultipletswithagivenorbitalangularmomentumLand total quark spinS, with the overall angular mo-mentum of a baryon given by⃗J = ⃗L+ ⃗S. The confiningand spin-independent part of the short-range interac-tion will cause splittings between and within multipletsof states with different orbital angular momentumL,and the short distance interactions between the quarks,for example those in the work of De Rujula, Georgi andGlashow, will further split those multiplets into groupsof states with the same total quark spinS.
It is always possible to describe the orbital angularmomentum of a basis state used to describe the wavefunction of a baryon in terms of the angular momentumof the orbital wave functions in the two vectors requiredto describe the relative positions of the quarks. Thesecan be conveniently chosen to be the Jacobi coordinates⃗ ρ= 1√2 (⃗ r1 −⃗ r2) ,⃗λ= 1√6 (⃗ r1 + ⃗ r2 −2⃗ r3)(9.1.1)showninFig. 9.1.3,wherethe ⃗ ri arethevectorpositionsof the three quarks. The total orbital angular momen-tum is then⃗L= ⃗lρ+⃗lλ, and the parity of the resultingstate isP = (−1)lρ+lλ. It is simple to show that all val-ues of baryon spin and parity can be attained by variouschoices of the eigenvalues for quarks moving in a staticpotential; in contrast to the situation in mesons, thereare no baryons with ‘exotic’ quantum numbers. Exoticquantum numbers in mesons require degrees of freedomlike those of the glue binding the hadrons together tobe in other than theirJP = 0+ ground state.
Thissituationiscomplicatedinthepresenceofspin-orbit (vector in spin and vector in space coupled to ascalar)andtensor( S = 2 andL= 2 coupledtoascalar)interactions between the quarks. These are present inmodels which have short-distance interactions betweenthe quarks based on the exchange of a vector boson,such as those due to one-gluon exchange. The evidenceFig. 9.1.3The three-body Jacobi coordinate vectors⃗ ρand ⃗λ.312 9 BARYONSfor the presence of such interactions in the spectrum ofbaryons is weaker than that for the presence of interac-tions which are simultaneous spin and orbital angularmomentum scalars; this is discussed in what follows.
The dominance in the baryon spectrum of simulta-neous quark spin and orbital angular momentum scalarinteractions, when combined with the observation thatstates assigned quark spinS = 3 /2 are more massivethan those with S = 1 /2, allowed Klempt [2663] tofit the spectrum of baryons made of {u,d,s }quarkswith a mass formula. The squares of the masses ofbaryons are proportional to their orbital angular mo-menta L, as in Regge theory and, approximately, thespectrum of a linear confining potential. For a givenflavor of baryon, more massive recurrences of the sameJP quantum numbers were assigned the same gap inmass-squared as orbital excitations.
Symmetry under particle exchangeTherequirementofPaulisymmetryimplies,intheisospinsymmetric limit, that the wave functions of baryons aretotally symmetric under the exchange of light quarks,since the color wave function is totally antisymmetricin the absence of excitation of the gluon fields. For non-strange baryons made up of three light quarks, thismeans that each component of the wave function mustbe a basis function for a representation of the exchangegroup S3. These basis functions are either totally sym-metric(S) underparticleexchange,totallyantisymmet-ric(A),oroneofapairwithmixedsymmetry {Mρ,Mλ}that transform into each other under the elements ofS3in a predictable way. The rules for this transformationcan be found, for example, by examining the result ofthe various exchanges on the relative position vectors⃗ ρand ⃗λ.
The rules of combining the spin angular momentumof threeS = 1 /2 particles require that the overall spinwave function of the quarks for all values of the totalquark spin projectionMS be either totally symmetric,when S = 3 /2, or be one of a pair of states of mixedsymmetry whenS = 1/2. The same rules apply for theisospin wave functions for baryons made up of threelight quarks, ∆-flavor baryons with I = 3 /2 and N-flavor baryons withI = 1/2.
The lowest lying basis state for the spatial wavefunctions of ground-state baryons made up only of lightquarks have LP = 0 +, and are totally symmetric un-der quark exchange. Overall exchange symmetry thenrequires that the flavor and spin wave functions be com-bined by using the rules for combining two representa-tions ofS3. For∆baryons this is trivial, since both thespin and flavor wave functions are totally symmetric.
For N baryons, the mixed-symmetry spin(χ) and fla-vor (φ) wave functions are combined to the symmetriclinear combination1√2(χMρφMρ + χMλφMλ).
The wave functions of baryons with a given flavor andspin-parity JP can be expanded in a basis of statesthat satisfy the requirements of antisymmetry underexchange of identical (or nearly identical, foru ↔d)quarks. A convenient choice is to use a harmonic oscil-lator (HO) basis, which has the useful feature of beingform invariant under Fourier transformation; another isthe Sturmian basis, which has improved large momen-tum behavior useful for calculating decay form factors,but is harder to use in both coordinate and momentumspace. Configuration mixing due to the confining po-tential and the short-range interactions between quarkscan be implemented by diagonalization of the Hamilto-nian matrix calculated in this basis.
The rules for combining representations of the ex-change groupS3 are used to construct this basis fromstateswithgivenvaluesofradial {nρ,nλ},orbital {L,lρ,lλ}, and spinS quantum numbers (magnetic quantumnumbershavebeensuppressed,andthesumsandClebsch-Gordan coefficients required to form states of definite{L,S,J }are assumed). It is often convenient to expandthe wave function up to a given energy, or equivalentlypolynomial order, which in the HO basis isE = (2nρ+ lρ+ 3/2)ℏωρ+ (2nλ+ lλ+ 3/2)ℏωλ, (9.1.2)whereωρ andωλ areoscillatorenergiesrelatedby α2ρ,λ =mρ,λωρ,λ to the scaleα at which the radial wave func-tions fall with distance and the reduced masses, equalwhen all three quark masses are the same. Karl andObryk [2664] give the general procedure up to fourth-order polynomials. Examples of how to construct thesebases can be found in [729, 2665, 2666]; for a pedagog-ical overview see, for example, Ref. [2667].
It is not necessary to antisymmetrize the wave func-tions of baryons under the exchangesu↔s or d↔s.
It is convenient to use the ‘uds’ basis [729] for baryonswithS = −1 or−2, which uses basis states that have ei-ther symmetry or antisymmetry under these exchanges.
Baryon resonance classification schemeThe quantum numbers of the total orbital angular mo-mentum ⃗L = ⃗lρ + ⃗lλ and spin ⃗S = ∑i⃗ si are not goodquantum numbers in a relativistic theory. The parityof such states is given byP = ( −1)lρ+lλ. It is alwayspossible to use a basis of states with specific values ofL and S which can couple to the total angular mo-mentum J of the baryon being described. These are9.1 Theoretical overview of the baryon spectrum 313then mixed in the eigenstates of a Hamiltonian that in-cludes interactions that are not simultaneous scalars inboth spin and space, but are overall scalars of the form∑qCkqRk,qSk,−q, where Rk and Sk are tensor opera-tors of rankk acting on the spatial and spin bases, andthe Ckq are the coefficients required to make the resultan overall scalar. Examples are the tensor (k= 2) inter-actions which occur in models of the short-range inter-actions between quarks, and spin-orbit (k= 1) interac-tions. To the extent that these interactions are small, aclassification scheme based on the{L,S}values of thedominant component of a configuration-mixed eigen-state is useful.
It may also be useful to further break down setsof states with the same{L,S}values into those withspecific spatial symmetries. As an example, consider ex-citations ofN and ∆flavored baryons, which are madeup of only{u,d}quarks. It is useful to enumerate basisstates in a harmonic-oscillator basis. Because of isospinsymmetry, this basis hasωρ = ωλ in Eq.9.1.2, so thatE = [2(nρ + nλ) + lρ + lλ + 3] ℏω= [N + 3]ℏω.
Ground statesBaryon states can be classified according to the flavor-spin SU(6) multiplet in which they predominantly lie.
This would be an exact symmetry of the Hamitonian ifit was simultaneously invariant under both rotationsof quark flavors in the SU(3)f space, and indepen-dent of the spin projections of the quarks. Althoughuseful as a classification scheme, this is clearly only avery approximate symmetry: In addition to the flavor-symmetry breaking effect of the larger strange quarkmass, the measured mass differenceM∆ −MN ≃300MeV shows that interactions between quarks are notindependent of their spin. In this scheme the ground-state nucleon lies in anSU(3)f octet of ground-statebaryons with J = S = 1 /2, which are, in order ofincreasing strangeness, {n,p,Λ 0,Σ+,0,−,Ξ0,−}, giving(2S+1)·8 = 16 states. The ground-state∆is a memberof an SU(3)f decuplet of baryons withJ = S = 3 /2,which are {∆,Σ∗,Ξ∗,Ω}, giving (2S + 1) ·10 = 40states. Collectively, these dominantlyLP = 0 + statesmake up theSU(6) multiplet, labeled[56,0+].
Following the notation of Isgur and Karl [2666], wecanlabelharmonic-oscillatorbasisstatesby |X2S+1LπJP⟩,whereXis the flavor,Lis given in{S,P,D... }notation,and π is the spatial exchange symmetry, either totallysymmetric (S), mixed symmetry (M), or totally anti-symmetric (A). In this notation, the dominantN = 0components of the ground state non-strange baryonsare|N2SS1/2+⟩, |∆4SS3/2+⟩.
Negative-parity statesThe low lying (dominantlyN = 1) negative-parity non-strange excitations are made up of a triplet ofS = 3/2N states and a doublet ofS = 1/2 N states with mixedflavor symmetry|N4PM(1/2−,3/2−,5/2−)⟩, |N2PM(1/2−,3/2−)⟩.
Their spatial wave functions necessarily have mixed ex-changesymmetry,sincetheyareproportionalto Y1m(Ωρ)∝ρm, where ρm is a spherical component of the vec-tor ⃗ ρ, or Y1m(Ωλ) ∝λm. There is also a a doublet ofS = 1/2 ∆ states withS flavor symmetry,|∆2PM(1/2−,3/2−)⟩.
These negative-parity resonances are members of theSU(6) multiplet [70,1−], with two flavor octets ofS ={1/2,3/2} states and a decuplet of S = 1 /2 states[symmetric under SU(3)f], plus a flavor singlet stateΛ, with S = 1 /2. References [729, 2664, 2667] showhow the rules for combining representations of the ex-change groupS3 can be applied to yield properly anti-symmetrized basis state wave functions. Basis stateswith the same flavor, spin, and parity can and will un-dergo configuration mixing when a model Hamiltonianis diagonalized.
Positive-parity excited statesThis scheme can be extended to, for example, positive-parity non-strange excitations, dominantly describedby N = 2 basis states. This is complicated by the pres-ence of both radial and orbital excitations. There arethree radial excitations that havenρ = 1 or nλ = 1 ,and, in a three-body system,lρ = lλ = 1 coupled toL = 0 ; linear combinations form L = 0 states withdefinite (S or M) exchange symmetry. There are alsoorbital excitations withlρ = 2 or lλ = 2, orlρ = lλ = 1.
Since they have positive parity, these baryons must bedescribed by basis states with evenlρ + lλ.
After forming linear combinations of spatial basisstates to form anti-symmetrized basis state wave func-tions, we have a total of 21 basis states that contributeat N = 2 to the wave functions ofN and ∆ states.
These are radial excitations|N2SS′1/2+⟩, |∆4SS′3/2+⟩in theSU(6) multiplet [56′,0+], and|N4SM3/2+⟩, |∆2SM1/2+}⟩, |N2SM1/2+⟩in the SU(6) multiplet [70,0+]; L = 2 orbital excita-tions that are admixtures oflρ = 2 and lλ = 2,|∆4DS(1/2+,3/2+,5/2+,7/2+)⟩, |N2DS(3/2+,5/2+)⟩314 9 BARYONSin theSU(6) multiplet [56,2+], and|N4DM(1/2+,3/2+,5/2+,7/2+)⟩, |∆2DM(3/2+,5/2+)⟩,|N2DM(3/2+,5/2+)⟩,in theSU(6) multiplet [70,2+], andL= 1 orbital exci-tations formed fromlρ = 1 and lλ = 1|N2PA(1/2+,3/2+)⟩ (9.1.3)in theSU(6) multiplet [20,1+].
The JP = 1 /2+ nucleon and theJP=3/2+, isospinI=3/2∆groundstateshavedominantcomponentswithN=0, L=0 andS=1/2 andS=3/2, respectively. Spin-independent and spin-scalar (contact) interactions be-tween the quarks (arising from their short-distance in-teractionsandconfinement)allowmixingbetweenthreebasis states: theN = 0 ground state|N2SS1/2+⟩, andthe L=0, S=1/2 states|N2SS′1/2+⟩and |N2SM1/2+⟩.
Tensor (or spin-orbit) interactions cause mixings withthe L=2, S=3/2 state |N4DM1/2+⟩, and the L=1,S=1/2 state|N2PA1/2+⟩. The situation is simpler forthe N=0 ground state|∆4SS3/2+⟩, which mixes withthe L=0, S=3/2 radial excitation |∆4SS′3/2+⟩, andthe L=2, S = 3/2 orbital excitations|∆4DS3/2+⟩and|∆2DM3/2+⟩.Theresulting D-wavecomponentsinboththe N and ∆ wave functions can lead to measurableconsequences in the photo- and electro-production am-plitudes for the transitionγ(∗)N →∆. For details, seethe review onN and ∆resonance electro-production inthe 2022 RPP [476].
HyperonsIf we use a basis of states that imposesSU(6) symmetrydespite the larger strange quark mass, this classificationscheme extends to the hyperonsΛand Σ, Ξ, andΩ. Asan example, the notation of Isgur and Karl [2666] forthegroundstate SU(3)f singletΛis|Λ12SM1/2+⟩.TheSU(3)f singlet wave function is totally antisymmetricunder quark exchange, and so is included in the wavefunction of the radial excitation|Λ12PA1/2+⟩, with itsantisymmetric spatial wave function; other radial re-currences such as|Λ82SS1/2+⟩necessarily involve theSU(3)f octet flavor wave functions, so the notation issupplemented by theSU(3)f multiplet (singlet, octet,or decuplet) in which the state lies. The total num-ber of basis states at each harmonic oscillator level forΞ baryons, containing two identical strange quarks, isthe sum of the number ofN and ∆states at that samelevel. There is a one-to-one correspondence between ba-sis states forΩ baryons and those of the∆ states.
Constructing the wave functions is made simpler byuse of theuds basis [729], which requires overall anti-symmetry only under exchange of equal mass quarks.
In this basis, the exchange symmetry of the⃗ ρand ⃗λrelative coordinate wave functions are specified sepa-rately. It is always possible to convert from theudsbasis back to a basis with definiteSU(3)f symmetrywhen that is convenient, for example when calculatingstrong decays [2668].
9.1.3 Constituent quark modelsConstituent quark models treat a baryon as made upof three ‘valence’ quark degrees of freedom, with thegluon fields providing a static potential in which thequarks move. In flux-tube models [2366, 2669, 2670]this is treated as the lowest energy state of a systemof three strings that meet at a junction, whose en-ergy is proportional to their length. There are severalapproaches to the treatment of the short-range inter-actions between the quarks, which are responsible forsplitting groups of states which would otherwise be de-generate or have their flavor dependence explained byviolations of SU(3)f symmetry due to the additionalmass of the strange quark. These approaches are brieflyoutlined here.
One-gluon exchange modelsTheearliestconstituentquarkmodelshadshort-distanceinteractionsbasedontheexchangeofasinglegluon[ 728],which postulate that asymptotic freedom implies thathigh momentum transfer interactions between quarksare dominated by the exchange of a gluon. The resultcan be written as the interaction between two color-magnetic dipoles, with a⃗λi·⃗λj dependence on the col-ors of quarksi and j, and spatial dependence given bythe Fourier transform of the vector gluon propagator.
Here the λi are the generators of SU(3)c realized inthe quark triplet basis. This naturally leads to a spin-independent Coulomb interaction at short range, and,with the assumption of point-like constituent quarks, a‘contact’ interaction proportional to2αs3mimj∑i 2 GeV2. This indicates that the negative con-stant value shown by the data is likely due to meson-baryon contributions that are not included in the the-oretical models. For the scalar quadrupole ratioRSMthe asymptotic prediction in holographic QCD (hQCD)[2788] is:RSM = ImS1+ImM1+→−1, at Q 2 →∞, (9.3.24)whileREM inhQCDispredictedtoapproach+1asymp-totically. The RSM data show indeed a strong trendtowards increasing negative values at largerQ2, semi-quantitatively described by both calculations atQ2 <4 GeV2. The Dyson-Schwinger equation approach pre-dicts a flattening ofRSM at Q2 > 4 GeV2, while theLight Front relativistic Quark Model predicts a nearconstant negative slope ofRSM(Q2) also at higherQ2.
9.3.6 The Roper resonance N(1440)12+The Roper resonance, discovered in 1964 [2789] in aphase shift analysis of elasticπN scattering data, hasbeen differently interpreted for half a century. In thenon-relativistic quark model (nrQM), the state is thefirst radial excitation of the nucleon ground state witha mass expected around 1750 MeV, much higher thanthe measured Breit-Wigner mass of≈1440 MeV. Thisdiscrepancy is now understood as the consequence of adynamical coupled channel effect that shifts the massbelow the mass of theN(1535)1/2− state, the negative-parity partner of the nucleon [2790]. Another problemwith the quark model was the sign of the transitionform factor A1/2(Q2 = 0) , predicted in the nrQM aslarge and positive, while experimental analyses showeda negative value.
These discrepancies resulted in different interpreta-tions of the state that could only be resolved with elec-troproduction data from CLAS at Jefferson Lab, thedevelopment of continuous QCD approximations in theDyson-Schwinger equation approach [2791] and LightFrontRelativisticQMwithmomentum-dependentquarkmasses[2769]showninFig. 9.3.6,andLatticedata[ 2792,2793]. A recent review of the history and current statusof the Roper resonance, is presented in a colloquium-stylearticlepublishedinReviewofModernPhysics[ 2794].
Descriptionsofthebaryonresonancetransitionsformfactors,includingtheRoperresonance N(1440)12+,havealso been carried out within holographic models [2795,2796]. In the rangeQ2 <0.6 GeV2, calculations basedon meson-baryon degrees of freedom and effective fieldtheory [2784] have been successfully performed, as maybe seen in Fig.9.3.6. Earlier model descriptions, suchas the Isgur-Karl model that describe the nucleon asa system of 3 constituent quarks in a confining poten-tial and a one-gluon exchange contribution leading to amagnetic hyperfine splitting of states [729, 2699], andthe relativized version of Capstick [736] have popular-334 9 BARYONSized the model that became the basis for many fur-ther developments and variations, e.g. the light frontrelativistic quark model, and the hypercentral quarkmodel [2797]. Other models were developed in parallel.
The cloudy bag model [742] describes the nucleon as abag of 3 constituent quarks surrounded by a cloud ofpions. It has been mostly applied to nucleon resonanceexcitations in real photoproduction,Q2 = 0 [742, 2798],with some success in the description of the∆(1232)32+and the Roper resonance transitions.
There is agreement with the data atQ2 >1.5 GeV2for these two states, while the meson-baryon contribu-tionsforthe ∆(1232) aremoreextended,andagreementwith the quark based calculations is reached atQ2 >4 GeV2. The calculations deviate significantly from thedata at lowerQ2, which indicates the presence of non-quark core effects. For the Roper resonance such contri-butions have been described successfully in dynamicalmeson-baryon models [2799] and in effective field the-ory [2784]. Calculations on the Lattice for the N-Ropertransition form factorsFpR1 and FpR2 , which are com-binations of the transition amplitudesA1/2 and S1/2,have been carried out with dynamical quarks [2793].
The results agree well with the data in the rangeQ2 <1.0 GeV2,wheredataandcalculationsoverlapFig. 9.3.7.
NewelectroproductiondataontheRoper[ 2787]andon several higher mass states have been obtained in the2-pion channel, specifically inep→e′pπ+π− [2800].
The mass of the Roper state has been computed onthe Lattice and extrapolated to the physical pion mass,showing good agreement with the physical value mea-sured with a Breit-Wigner parametrization. It shouldbe noted that the Roper mass measured at the polein the complex plane is significantly different from thevalue obtained using the BW ansatz. Supported by anextensive amount of single pion electroproduction data,covering the full phase space in the pion polar and az-imuthalcenter-of-massangles,andaccompaniedbysev-eral theoretical modeling, we can summarize our cur-rent understanding of theN(1440)12+state as follows:– The Roper resonance is, at heart, the first radialexcitation of the nucleon.
– Itconsistsofawell-defineddressed-quarkcore,whichplays a role in determining the system’s propertiesat all length scales, but exerts a dominant influenceon probes withQ2 >m2N, wheremN is the nucleonmass.
– Thecoreisaugmentedbyamesoncloud,whichbothreduces the Roper’s core mass by≈20%, therebysolving the mass problem that was such a puzzlein constituent quark model treatments, and, at lowQ2, contributes an amount to the electroproductiontransition form factors that is comparable in mag-nitude with that of the dressed quark core, but van-ishes rapidly asQ2 is increased beyondm2N.
As stated in the conclusions of [2794]: ”The fifty yearsof experience with the Roper resonance have deliveredlessonsthatcannotbeemphasizedtoostrongly.Namely,in attempting to predict and explain the QCD spec-trum, one must fully consider the impact of meson-baryonfinalstateinteractionsandthecouplingbetweenchannels and states that they generate, and look be-yond merely locating the poles in the S-matrix, whichthemselves reveal little structural information, to alsoconsider the Q2 dependencies of the residues, whichserve as a penetrating scale-dependent probe of reso-nance composition.”9.3.7 T ransition F orm F actors of N(1535)12−- Astate with a hard quark core.
Thisstateistheparitypartnerstatetothegroundstatenucleon, with the same spin 1/2 but with opposite par-ity, its quark content requires an orbital L=1 excitationin the transition from the proton. In theSU(6) ⊗O(3)symmetry scheme, the state is a member of the[70,1−]super multiplet. This state couples equally toNπ andto Nη final state. It has therefore be probed using bothdecay channelsep→epηand ep→eNπ+,0. Because ofisospin I = 1 /2 for nucleon states, the coupling to thecharged π+nchannel is preferred overπ0powing to theClebsch-Gordon coefficients.
The A1/2 helicity amplitude for theγpN(1535)12−resonance excitation shown in Fig.9.3.7 represents thelargest range inQ2 of all nucleon states for which res-onance transition form factors have been measured aspart of the broad experimental program at JLab.
For this state, as well as for theN(1440)12+state,advanced relativistic quark model calculations [2803],DSE-QCD calculations [2791] and Light Cone sum ruleresults[2804]areavailable,employingQCD-basedmod-eling of the excitation of the quark core for the firsttime.
Thetransversetransitionamplitude A1/2 ofN(1535)12−is a prime example of the power of meson electropro-duction to unravel the internal structure of the reso-nance transition. In the previous section9.2, the na-ture of this state is discussed as a possible example ofa dynamically generated resonance. The electroproduc-tion data shown here reveal structural aspects of thestate and its nature that require a different interpre-tation. The transition form factor A1/2 of the state,shown in Fig.9.3.7, is quantitatively reproduced overa large range inQ2 by two alternative approaches, theLFRQM and the LCSR. Both calculations are based onthe assumptions of the presence of a 3-quark core. Note9.3 Nucleon Resonances and Transition Form Factors 335-75-50-2502550751001250123456789Q2 (GeV2)N(1535)1/2- A1/2N/ CLASpd CLASpd Hall CCLAS\*RPPMB contributionsLF RQMLC SR (LO)LC SR (NLO)Fig. 9.3.7Left & middle: Dirac and Pauli transition form factorsF1 andF2 for the proton toN(1440)1/2+ transition compared toLattice QCD calculations [2793] with pion masses (in GeV): 0.39 (red squares), 0.45 (orange triangles), and 0.875 (green circles) onthe Nf = 2 + 1 anisotropic lattices, compared to CLAS results (black circles). TheF1 and F2 form factors are linear combinationsof theA1/2 and S1/2 amplitudes. Right: The transverse transition helicity amplitudeA1/2 versus Q2. AtQ2 >2GeV2 the dataare well described by the light-cone sum rules LCSR [2801]. The light front relativistic quark model (LFRQM) [2802] describesthat data atQ2 >1GeV2.
that there is a deviation from the quark calculationsat Q2 < 1 −2 GeV2, highlighted as the shaded areain Fig. 9.3.7, which may be assigned to the presenceof non-quark contributions. Attempts to compute thetransition form factors within strictly dynamical mod-els have not succeeded in explaining the data [2805].
The discrepancy could be resolved if the character ofthe probe, meson (pion) in the case of hadron inter-action and short range photon interaction in the caseof electroproduction, probe different parts of the reso-nance’s spatial structure: peripheral in case of mesonscattering and short distance behavior in electropro-duction. The peripheral meson scattering and lowQ2meson photoproduction reveal the dynamical featuresof the state, whereas highQ2 electroproduction revealsthe structure of the quark core.
9.3.8 The helicity structure of the N(1520)32−The N(1520)32−state corresponds to the lowest excitednucleon resonance withJP = 32−. Its helicity structureis defined by theQ2 dependence of the two transversetransition amplitudes A1/2 and A3/2. They are bothshown in Fig.9.3.8. A particularly interesting featureof this state is that at the real photon point,A3/2 isstrongly dominant, whileA1/2 is very small. However,at high Q2, A1/2 is becoming dominant, while A3/2drops rapidly. This behavior is qualitatively consistentwith the expectation of asymptotic QCD, which pre-dicts the transition helicity amplitudes to behave like:A1/2 ∝ aQ3 ,A3/2 ∝ bQ5 . (9.3.25)The helicity asymmetryAhel =A21/2 −A23/2A21/2 + A23/2, (9.3.26)shown in Fig.9.3.8, illustrates this rapid change in thehelicity structure of theγvpN(1520)3/2− transition. AtQ2 >2 GeV2, A1/2 fully dominates the process.
9.3.9 The helicity transition amplitudes to theN(1535)12−resonanceThe Roper N(1440)12+resonance, at the core, is a ra-dial excitation. Its parity partner, theN(1535)12−, inthe quark model, is an orbitally excited quark state ofthe nucleon. It is then interesting to compare the tran-sition amplitude to theN(1535)12−with the amplitudeto the Roper resonance. The N(1535)12−is, togetherwith the∆(1232)32+, the best measured state, and bothits transverse and longitudinal (scalar) amplitudes arewell measured [2754]. Figure9.3.9 shows the transverseamplitude A1/2 versus Q2. They reveal a very differ-ent behavior at low Q2, where N(1535)12−indicatesonly small effects from meson-baryon contributions be-low Q2 ≈1GeV2, while theN(1440)12+changes sign atsmall Q2 and reveals a much more prominent impactof meson-baryon contributions. TheQ2 dependence ofthe N(1535)12−is well reproduced by LC SR in LOand NLO. There have been attempts to explain thetransition form factor of theN(1535)12−as a dynami-cally generated resonance [2805] that does not achievequantitative agreement with experiment and concludesthat admixture with a genuine three-quark state is de-manded that could help to better reproduce the mag-nitude or theQ2 falloff of theA1/2 helicity amplitude.336 9 BARYONSFig. 9.3.8 The transverse helicity transition amplitudes ofN(1520)32− versus Q2, compared to the LFRQM,A1/2 (left), A3/2(middle). The shaded area indicates the contribution from non-quark contributions as estimated from the difference of the measureddata points and the LF RQM contribution, likely due to hadronic contributions. Right: Helicity asymmetryAhel, as defined inEq. 9.3.26. Graphics from Ref. [2754]9.3.10 The N(1675)52−state - revealing the meson-baryon contributionsIn previous discussions we have concluded that meson-baryon degrees of freedom provide significant strengthto the resonance excitation in the low-Q2 domain wherequark based approaches LF RQM, DSE/QCD, and LCSR calculations fail to reproduce the transition ampli-tudes quantitatively. Our conclusion rests, in part, withthis assumption. But, how can we be certain of the va-lidity of this conclusion?The N(1675)52−resonance allows us to test this as-sumption, quantitatively. Figure9.3.9 shows our cur-rent knowledge of the transverse helicity amplitudesA1/2(Q2) and A3/2(Q2), for proton target comparedto RQM [2802] and hypercentral CQM [2807] calcu-lations. The specific quark transition for aJP = 52−state belonging to the [SU(6) ⊗O(3)] = [70 ,1−] su-permultiplet configuration, in non-relativistic approx-imation prohibits the transition from the proton in asingle quark transition. This suppression, known as theMoorhouse selection rule [725], is valid for the trans-verse transition amplitudes A1/2 and A3/2 at all Q2.
It should be noted that this selection rule does applyto the transition from a proton target, it does not ap-ply to the transition from the neutron, which is con-sistent with the data. Modern quark models that gobeyond single quark transitions, confirm quantitativelythe suppression resulting in very small amplitudes fromprotons but large ones from neutrons. Furthermore,a direct computation of the hadronic contribution tothe transition from protons confirms this (Fig.9.3.9).
The measured helicity amplitudes off the protons arealmost exclusively due to meson-baryon contributionsas the dynamical coupled channel (DCC) calculationindicates (dashed line). The close correlation of theDCC calculation and the measured data for the casewhen quark contributions are nearly absent, supportsthe phenomenological description of the helicity ampli-tudes in terms of a 3-quark core that dominate at highQ2 and meson-baryon contributions that can make im-portant contributions at lowerQ2.
9.3.11 Resonance lightfront transition charge den-sities.
Knowledge of the helicity amplitudes in a largeQ2 al-lows for the determination of the transition charge den-sities on the light cone in transverse impact parameterspace (bx,by) [2809]. The relations between the helic-ity transition amplitudes and the Dirac and Pauli res-onance transition form factors are given by:A1/2 = e Q−√K(4MNM∗)1/2 {FNN∗1 + FNN∗2 }(9.3.27)S1/2 = e Q−√K(4MNM∗)1/2(Q+Q−2M∗)(M∗ + MN)Q2×{FNN∗1 − Q2(M∗ + MN)2 FNN∗2 }, (9.3.28)where M∗ is the mass of the excited stateN∗, K =M∗2−M2N2M∗ is the equivalent photon energy,Q+ and Q−are short hands for Q± ≡√M∗ ±MN)2 + Q2. Thechargeandmagneticlightfronttransitiondensities ρNN∗0and ρNN∗T , respectively, are given as:ρNN∗0 (⃗b) =∫ ∞0dQ2πJ0(bQ)FNN∗1 (Q2) (9.3.29)ρNN∗T (⃗b) = ρNN∗0 (⃗b) + sin( φb −φs) ×∫ ∞0dQ2πQ2(M∗ + MN)J1(bQ)FNN∗2 (Q2) . (9.3.30)Similar transverse charge transition densities can bedefinedfor JP = 32+statessuchasthe ∆(1232)32+.Thishas been studied in [2810] and is shown in Fig.9.3.11.9.3 Nucleon Resonances and Transition Form Factors 337-5051015200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5Q2 (GeV2)N(1675)5/2- A1/2 (p)CLASCLASRPPLF RQMhCQMMB (EBAC)-10-5051015200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5N(1675)5/2 - A 3/2 (p)CLASRPPCLASLF RQMhCQMMB (EBAC)Q2 (GeV 2)Fig. 9.3.9 The transverse amplitudes of the proton toN(1675)52− transition compared to the LF RQM [2806], hypercentralQM [2807], and contributions from meson-baryon (MB) coupled channel dynamics [2808]. Left:A1/2, Middle:A3/2. Both quarkmodels predict very small amplitudes for the proton, while the meson-baryon contributions estimate is large and is close to thedata. Right: A1/2 for neutron target (only photoproduction data available) compared to the LFRQM and hCQM. Both quarkmodels predict large amplitudes for neutrons, more than factor 10 compared to protons atQ2 = 0 . Assuming similar meson-baryoncontributions as in the proton case with opposite sign could quantitatively explain the single measured value at the photon point.
Acomparisonof N(1440)12+andN(1535)12−isshowninFigure 9.3.10.Therearecleardifferencesinthechargetransition densities between the two states. The Roperstate has a softer positive core and a wider negativeouter cloud thanN(1535)12−and develops a larger shiftin by when the proton is polarized along thebx axis.
Fig. 9.3.10 Left panels: N(1440), top: projection of chargedensities on by, bottom: transition charge densities when theproton is spin polarized along bx. Right panels: same forN(1535). Note that the densities are scaled with b2 to em-phasize the outer wings. Color code:negative charge is blue,positive charge is red. Note that all scales are the same for easeof comparison [2811]. Graphics credit: F.X. Girod.
9.3.12 Single Quark T ransition ModelMany of the exited states for which there is informa-tion about the transition form factors available havebeen assigned as members of the[SU(6),LP] = [70,1−]super multiplet of the[SU(6) ⊗O(3)] symmetry group.
In a model, where only single quark transitions to theexcited states are considered [2812–2814], only 3 of theamplitudes need to be known to determine the remain-ing 16 transverse helicity amplitudes for all states in[70,1−] including on neutrons. However, the picture isnow more complicated due to the strong admixture ofmeson-baryon components to the single quark transi-tion especially in the lowerQ2 range. This requires amodel to separate the single quark contributions fromthe hadronic part before projections for other states canbe made [2815].
9.3.13 Higher mass baryons and hybrid baryonsThe existence of baryons containing significant activegluonic components in the wave function has been pre-dicted some decade ago [495] employing Lattice QCDsimulations. The lowest such ”hybrid” state is expectedto be aJP = 12+nucleon state. LQCD projects a massof 1.3 GeV above the nucleon mass, i.e. approximately2.2-2.3 GeV, and several other states should appearclosebyin JP = 12+andJP = 32+,asseeninFig. 9.3.12.
How do we identify these states? Hybrid baryonshave same spin-parity as other ordinary baryons. Incontrast to hybrid mesons, there are no hybrid baryonswith ”exotic” quantum numbers. One possibility is tosearch for more states than the quark model predicts insome mass range. The other possibility is to study the338 9 BARYONStransition form factors of excited states. Hybrid statesmay be identified as states with a differentQ2 behaviorthan what is expected from a 3-quark state. The sen-sitivity [2816] is demonstrated for the Roper resonancethat projected a very rapid drop of theA1/2(Q2) withQ2, and S1/2(Q2) ∼0 prediction. Both are incompat-ible with what we know today about the Roper res-onance. Precision electroproduction data in the massrange above 2 GeV will be needed to test high massstates for their potential hybrid character, e.g. from ex-periments at CLAS12 [2817].
Fig. 9.3.11 Quark transverse transition charge density cor-responding to the p → ∆+ transition. Light color indicatespositive charge, dark color indicates negative charge. Top: pand ∆ are unpolarized. Middle: p and∆ are polarized alongbx axis generating an electric dipole along theby axis. Bot-tom: Quadrupole contribution to transition density. Graphicsadapted from [2810].
9.3.14 Conclusions and OutlookIn this contribution we have focused on more recentresults of nucleon resonance transition amplitudes andtheir interpretation within LQCD and within most ad-vanced approaches, e.g. in light front relativistic quarkmodelsandapproacheswithtraceablelinkstofirstprin-ciple QCD such as Dyson-Schwinger Equations [2818]and light cone sum rules [2801]. These calculations de-scribe the transition form factors atQ2 ≥2 GeV2, whileat lowerQ2 values hadronic degrees of freedom must beincluded and could even dominate contributions of thequark core.
Forthelowestmassstates, ∆(1232)32+andtheRoperN(1440)12+, LQCD calculations have been carried outthat are consistent with the data within large uncer-tainties. These calculations are about one decade old,and new data, with higher precision in more extendedkinematic range have been added to the database thatwarrant new Lattice calculations at the physical pionmass to be carried out.
Over the past decade, eight baryon states in themass range from 1.85 to 2.15 GeV have been eitherdiscovered or evidence for the existence of states hasbeen significantly strengthened. Some of these statesare in the mass range and haveJPC quantum num-bers that could have significant contributions of glu-onic components. Such ”hybrid” states are in fact pre-dicted in LQCD [495]. These states appear with thesame quantum numbers as ordinary quark excitations,and can only be isolated from ordinary states due tothe Q2 dependence of their helicity amplitudes [2816],which is expected to be quite different from ordinary3-quark excitation. The study of hybrid baryon exci-tations then requires new electroproduction data espe-cially at low Q2 [2817] with different final states andwith masses above 2 GeV. Despite the very significantprogress made in recent years to further establish thelight-quark baryon spectrum and explore the internalstructureofexcitedstatesandtherelationshiptoQCD[ 2756,2819], much remains to be done. A vast amount of pre-cision data already collected needs to be included inthe multi-channel analysis frameworks, and polariza-tion data are still to be analyzed. There are approvedproposals to study resonance excitation at much higherQ2 and with higher precision at Jefferson Lab withCLAS12 [2820, 2821], which may begin to reveal thetransition to the bare quark core contributions at shortdistances.
A new avenue of experimental research has recentlybeen opened up with the first data-based extraction ofa gravitational property of the proton, its internal pres-sure distribution, which is represented by the gravita-9.4 Heavy-flavor baryons 339Fig. 9.3.12 Projections of excited baryons with dominantgluonic components (marked in blue shades) in LQCD with400MeV pions. The lowest hybrid baryon is projected with mass1.3 GeV above the nucleon mass. The1/2+ and 3/2+ statesare clustered in a narrow mass range of about 200 MeV.
tional form factorDq(t). It is one of the form factors ofthe QCD matrix element of the energy-momentum ten-sor, its internal pressure and shear stress distributionin space [2822, 2823]. These properties, as well as thedistribution of mass and angular momentum, and areaccessible directly in gravitational interaction, which ishighly impractical. However the relevant gravitationalform factorDq(t) for the ground state nucleon can beaccessedindirectlythroughtheprocessofdeeplyvirtualCompton scattering and in time-like Compton scatter-ing [1288, 2824]. Both processes, having aJ = 1 photonin the initial state as well as in the final state, containcomponents ofJ = 2 that couple to the proton througha tensor interaction, as gravity does [2825].
Mechanical properties of resonance transitions haverecently been explored for theN(1535)12−→N(938)gravitationaltransitionformfactorscalculationsin[ 2826]and in [2827]. In order to access these novel gravita-tional transition form factors experimentally, the nu-cleon to resonance transition generalized parton distri-butions must be studied. The framework for studyingthe N →N(1535) transition GPDs, which would en-able experimental access to these mechanical proper-ties, remains to be developed. The required effort isquite worthwhile as a new avenue of hadron physicshas opened up that remains to be fully explored.
9.4 Heavy-flavor baryonsEberhard Klempt and Sebastian Neubert9.4.1 IntroductionBaryons with one heavy quarkQ and a light diquarkqq provide an ideal place to study diquark correlationsand the dynamics of the light quarks in the environ-mentofaheavyquark.Theheavyquark isalmoststaticand provides the color source to the light quarks. Here,we attempt to understand the dynamics leading to thespectrum of baryons with one heavy quark.
TheReviewofParticlePhysics[ 939]lists28charmedbaryons (16 with known spin-parity) and 22 bottombaryons(15withknownspin-parity).Onedoublycharmedstate has been detected, the ground state Ξ++cc . (Itsisospin partnerΞ+cc is known as well, with poor evidenceand one star in RPP, but we do not count isospin part-ners separately.) In the decays of the lightest bottombaryon, exoticJ/ψp states, incompatible with a three-quark configuration, have been have been reported instudies of the reaction Λb → J/ψpK− [2828, 2829].
The search for further states and attempts to under-stand the underlying dynamics of heavy baryons areactive fields in particle physics. New information canbe expected from the upgrades of LHC, BELLE andJ-PARC, and from the new FAIR facility at GSI (seeSection 14).
9.4.2 Ground states of heavy baryonsMasses and lifetimesTable9.4.1 presents masses and life times of the groundstates of heavy baryons containing ab-quark. Naively,one could expect all these life times to represent thelife time of thebquark, that they all agree with the lifetimeofthe B0 meson.Thislifetimeis τB0 =(1519±4)fs.
Indeed, all life times agree within∼10% percent.
This is not at all the case when theb-quark is re-placed by a c-quark (see Table 9.4.2). The D0 has alife time τD0 = (410 .3 ±1.0) fs, the D+ has τD+ =(1033 ±5) fs. The life times of charmed baryons arespread over a wide range and do not agree with thelife times of D mesons. In addition to the decay ofTable 9.4.1Masses and lifetimes of baryon ground states withone b-quark. The second line gives the mass in MeV, the thirdline the life time in fs.
Λ0b Ξ−b Ξ0b Ω−b5619.60±0.17 5797.0 ±0.6 5791.9 ±0.5 6045.2 ±1.21464±11 1572 ±40 1480 ±0.030 1640 +180−170340 9 BARYONSTable 9.4.2Masses and lifetimes of baryon ground states withone c-quark. The second line gives the mass in MeV, the thirdline the life time in fs.
Λ0c Ξ+c Ξ0c Ω−c2286.46±0.14 2467.71 ±0.23 2470.44 ±0.2 2695.2 ±1.7201.5±2.7 453 ±5 151.9 ±2.4 268 ±26the c-quark, the c¯d pair in a D0 meson can annihi-late into a W+, a process forbidden for the D+. InB decays, the corresponding CKM matrix element issmall, and this effect is suppressed. Further significantcorrections are required to arrive at a consistent pic-ture for the decays of charmed mesons and baryons.
The authors of Ref. [1245] have performed an exten-sive study of the lifetimes within the heavy quark ex-pansion, and have included all known corrections. Theimpact of the charmed-quark mass and of the wave-functions of charmed hadrons were carefully studied.
Then, qualitative agreement between their calculationsand the experimental data was achieved. For a moredetailed discussion, see Section5.8.
The first state with two charmed quarks, theΞ+ccwas reported by the SELEX collaboration in two de-cay modes at a mass of (3518.9±0.9)MeV and with 5-6σ [2830, 2831]. In later searches, this state was neverconfirmed. The LHCb collaboration found its doublycharged partner Ξ++cc [2564]. Its mass is (3621.6±0.4)MeV, its life time (25.6±2.7)fs. Later, the LHCb collab-orationreportedevidencefora Ξ+cc baryonat(3623.0 ±1.4)MeV [2832]. It is seen with 3-4σonly but its mass is bet-ter compatible with an interpretation ofΞ+cc and Ξ++ccas isospin partners. A search for theΞ+bc remained un-successful [2833].
The flavor wave function: SU(4)In this contribution we discuss baryons with one heavy-quark flavor, with either a charm or a bottom quark.
Overall, we consider five quarks,u,d,s,c,b , but we willnot discuss baryons with one light (q = u,d,s ) andtwo different heavy quarks likeΞ+cb = ( ucb). Thus wecan restrict ourselves to SU(4). The four quarks havevery different masses, and the SU(4) symmetry is heav-ily broken, nevertheless it provides a guide to classifyheavy-quark baryons. Three-quark baryons can classi-fied according to4 ⊗4 ⊗4 = 20 s ⊕20m ⊕20m ⊕4a (9.4.1)into a fully symmetric 20-plet, two 20-plets of mixedsymmetry and a fully antisymmetric 4-plet. In stateswith one heavy quark only, there is one light quarkpair. The light diquark can be decomposed3 ⊗3 = ¯3a ⊕6s (9.4.2)The light diquark in the 6-plet is symmetric, in the¯3-plet antisymmetric.
Figure 9.4.1a shows the symmetric 20-plet, whichcontains the well-known baryon decuplet and a sextetof charmed baryons. In addition to Ξ+cc and Ξ++cc , aΩ+cc (with two charmed and one strange quarks) and aΩ++ccc are expected but not yet observed. All baryons inthe symmetric 20-plet in the ground state have a totalspin J = 3 /2. The three quark pairs are symmetricwith respect to (w.r.t.) their exchange, in particular thepair of light quarks is symmetric w.r.t. their exchange,they have SUF(3) multiplicity 6. Baryons with threecharmed quarks have not yet been discovered.
Figure 9.4.1b shows the mixed symmetry 20-plet ofheavy baryons. In the ground state they haveJ = 1/2.
Baryons with one heavy quark occupy the second layer.
The 6-plet and the¯3-plet are indicated. The sextet inthe first floor has a a symmetric light-quark pair, thetwo light-heavy quark pairs are then antisymmetric inflavor. The 3-plet in the first floor has an antisymmetriclight-quark pair, the light-heavy quark pairs are thensymmetric in flavor.
Finally, there is a fully anti-symmetric 4-plet. It isshown in Fig.9.4.1c. Ground-state baryons have a sym-metric spatial wave function. A spin wave function ofthree fermions has mixed symmetry. A fully symme-try, a fully antisymmetric and a mixed-symmetry wavefunction cannot be coupled to a fully symmetric wavefunction. Hence ground-state baryons cannot be in the4-plet. Only excited baryons can have a fully antisym-metric flavor wave function. Below, in Section 9.4.5,the wave functions and their symmetries are discussedin more detail.
9.4.3 Excited baryons: Selected experimental re-sultsBaBar, BELLE and LHCb:Most information on heavy baryons stems from threeexperiments, BaBar, BELLE and LHCb even thoughmany discoveries had already been made before withthe Split-Field-Magnet, by the SELEX, UA and LEPexperiments at CERN, and by the CDF experimentat FERMILAB. BaBar at SLAC (US) and BELLE atKEK (Japan) study the decays ofB mesons producedin asymetrice+e− storage rings with beam energies of9 (KEK: 7)GeV for electrons and 3.1 (KEK: 4)GeV forpositrons resulting in a center-of-mass energy equal tothe Υ(4S) mass of 10.58GeV. The LHCb experimentis placed at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN oper-ating at √s = 13 .6 GeV. The experiment is a single-arm forward spectrometer covering the pseudorapid-ity range 2 ≤ η ≤ 5. It is designed for the study9.4 Heavy-flavor baryons 341Fig. 9.4.1 Ground-state heavy baryons in SU(4). Baryons with one charm quark are represented by colored dots. Left: Thesymmetric20-plet.Center:Baryonsinthemixed-symmetry20-plet.Themixed-symmetry20-pletcontainsasextetwithasymmetriclight-quark pair (SUF(3) multiplicity 6) and a triplet with an anti-symmetric light-quark pair (SUF(3) multiplicity¯3). Right: Thefully antisymmetric 4-plet.
of particles containingb or c quarks. All three detec-tors have vertex reconstruction capabilities; BaBar andBELLE track charged particles in tracking chambersplaced in the 1.5T magnetic field of a superconduct-ing solenoid. Particle identification is provided by ameasurement of the specific ionization and by detec-tion of the Cherenkov radiation in reflecting ring imag-ing Cherenkov detectors. CsI(Tl)-crystal electromag-netic calorimeters allow for energy measurements ofelectrons and photons. LHCb is equipped with silicon-strip detector located upstream and downstream of adipole magnet with a bending power of about 4Tm.
Photons,electronsandhadronsareidentifiedbyacalori-meter system consisting of scintillating counters andpre-shower detectors, and an electromagnetic and a ha-dronic calorimeter. Muons are identified by a systemcomposed of alternating layers of iron and multiwireproportional chambers.
In the following we discuss three important resultsfrom these experiments that demonstrate the capabili-ties of the detectors.
Observation of Ω∗0c (2770) decaying to Ω0cγ by BaBar:The Babar experiment studied the inclusive reactione+e− → Ω∗0c X where X denote the recoiling parti-cles [2834]. Ω0c baryons are identified via different de-cay modes and reconstructed with a mass resolutionσRMS = 13 MeV. The γ is reconstructed in the Ω0cCsI(Tl)calorimeter.Figure 9.4.2showsthereconstructedΩ0c and theΩ∗0c in itsΩ∗0c →Ω0cγdecay. Obviously, theΩ∗0c (2770) is equivalent to ∆0(1232) with the u,d,dquarks exchanged by c,s,s , and the transition corre-sponds to the∆(1232) →Nγ decay.
First determination of the spin and parity of the charmed-strange baryon Ξ+c (2970) by BELLE.
The BELLE collaboration identified Ξ+c (2970) in thedecaychain Ξ+c (2970) →Ξ0c(2645)π+ →Ξ+c π−π+;Ξ+cis reconstructed from its decay intoΞ−π+π+ [2835].
Due to its mass,Ξ0c(2645) is likely the spin excitationwith JP = 3 /2+ of the JP = 1 /2+ ground state Ξ0c.
The helicity angle in the primary decay, i.e. the anglebetween theπ+ and the opposite of the boost directionin the c.m. frame both calculated in theΞ+c (2970) restframe, proved to be insensitive to some likelyJP com-binations. However, the predictions for differentJP’svary significantly for the angular distributions in thesecondary decay (see Fig.9.4.3).
The analysis shows that quantum numbersJP =1/2+ are preferred forΞ+c (2970). These are the quan-tum numbers of the Roper resonance. The BELLE col-laborationnotedthatitsmassdifferencetothe Ξc groundstate is about 500 MeV. The same excitation energy isrequired to excite the Roper resonance N(1440), theΛ(1600) and theΣ(1660), all withJP = 1/2+.
First observation of excited Ωb states by LHCb.
TheLHCbcollaborationsearchedfornarrowresonancesin the Ξ0b K− invariant mass distribution [2836]. TheΞ0b has a lifetime of (1.48±0.03)10−12 s, cτ ≈500 µm,which is sufficiently long to separate the interaction andthe decay vertices. Four peaks can be seen (Fig.9.4.4),which correspond to excited states of Ωc. With thegiven statistics, quantum numbers can not yet be de-termined.
9.4.4 The mass spectrum of excited heavy baryonsFigure 9.4.5 shows the mass spectrum of heavy baryonswith a single charm or bottom quark. Established light342 9 BARYONSFig. 9.4.2Left: The invariant mass distributions ofΩ0c candi-dates in their decay toΩ−π+ (a), Ω−π+π0 (b), Ω−π+π−π+(c), Ξ−K−π+π+ (d). MΩ0cis the reconstructed mass ofΩ0ccandidates, Xh denotes the daughter hyperon. Right: Invari-ant mass distribution ofΩ∗c → Ωcγ for the indivualΩ0c decaymodes (a-d) and for the sum (e). (Adapted from [2834].)Fig. 9.4.3Left: TheΞ+c π−π+ invariant mass distribution forevents in which theΞ+c π− invariant mass is compatible withthe Ξ0c(2645) mass. Right: The helicity angleθc between thedirection of the π− relative to the opposite direction of theΞ+c (2970) in the rest frame of theΞ0c(2645). (Adapted fromRef. [2835].)baryons with strangeness are shown for comparison.
The quantum numbers of low-mass heavy baryons aremostly known, for higher-mass states this informationis often missing. The masses are given as excitation en-ergies above theΛ (Λc, Λb) mass.
At the first glance, the spectrum looks confusing.
The Λ spectrum is crowded, there is a low-mass nega-tive-parityspindoublet,aseconddoublet–ataboutthesame mass as aΣspin doublet – a pair withJP = 1/2−and 5/2− where a3/2− state seems to be missing, andthen a positive-parity doublet withJP = 3 /2+,5/2+.
In the Λc spectrum, the higher-mass negative-paritystates and the positive-parity doublet are inverted inFig. 9.4.4Distribution of the mass differenceMΞ0b K− −MΞ0bfor Ξ0b K− candidates. The background is given by the wrong-sign candidatesΞ0b K+. (From Ref. [2836].)Fig. 9.4.5 Heavy baryons with charm or bottomnes anda comparison with light baryons with strangeness. All heavybaryons are shown, light baryons are shown at the pole massand are only included with 3\* or 4\* rating. When two quan-tum numbers are given, the first one refers to the lower-massstate, the second one to the state above. The states withL = lρ = lλ = 0 are shown in green, states withL = 1 inred (orange for members of¯4F), states L = 2 in blue, stateswith unknown spin-parity in brown.
mass100. The3/2+ −1/2+ hyperfine splitting decreasesrapidly when going fromΣ and Ξ to Σc and Ξc andfrom Σb and Ξb. It is interesting to note that a simi-lar pattern is observed in mesons: the hyperfine split-ting decreases when going fromρ−π to D∗ −D andto B∗ −B. Also, there is one Ξ 1/2+ ground statebut two states forΞc and Ξb. The lowest-massΩ hasJP = 3/2+,inthecharmsector,twolow-mass Ωc statesare known withJP = 1/2+ and 3/2+, theΩb spectrumhas just one low-mass state withJP = 1/2+.
9.4.5 Heavy baryons as three-quark systemsThe spatial wave functionThe orbital wave functions of excited states are classi-fied into two kinds of orbital excitations, theλ-modeand the ρ-mode (see Eqn. (9.1.1)). In heavy baryonswith one heavy quark, theλ-mode is the excitation of100 This inversion was predicted by Capstick and Isgur longbefore the states were discovered [736]9.4 Heavy-flavor baryons 343the coordinate between the heavy quark and the lightdiquark, and theρ-mode is the excitation of the diquarkcluster. In light-baryon excitations, theλand ρoscilla-tors are mostly both excited, e.g. tolλ = 1, lρ = 0 andlλ = 0 , lρ = 1 , the two components of the wave func-tion having a relative+ or −sign. In heavy baryonswith one heavy quark, the mixing between these twoconfigurations is small.
The two oscillators have different reduced masses,mρ and mλ:mρ = mq2 , mλ = 2mqmQ2mq + mQ. (9.4.3)Theratioofharmonicoscillatorfrequenciesisthengivenbyωλωρ=√13(1 + 2 mq/mQ) ≤1. (9.4.4)In the heavy-quark limit (mQ → ∞), the excitationenergies in theλ oscillator are reduced by a factor√3.
DiquarksWefirstconsiderthelightdiquark.Thetwolightquarkscan have either the symmetric flavor structure6F orthe antisymmetric flavor structure¯3F. The spin of thelight diquark can besqq = sl = 1 or sl = 0 leading to asymmetric or an antisymmetric spin wave function. Thecolor part of the wave function is totally antisymmetric.
Hence flavor and spin wave functions are linked. In anS-wave, scalar (“good” or g) and axial-vector (“bad” orb) diquarks can be formed. The intrinsic quark spinscouple to the internal orbital angular momentum lρ,leading to excited diquarks with orbital excitations.
(lρ = 0, S){sl = 0 ( A) , ¯3F (A) , jqq = 0 , (g)sl = 1 ( S) , 6F (S) , jqq = 1 , (b)(lρ = 1, A){sl = 0 ( A) , 6F (S) , jqq = 1 , (g)sl = 1 ( S) , ¯3F (A) , jqq = 0/1/2 ,(b)(lρ = 2, S){sl = 0 ( A) , ¯3F (A) , jqq = 2 , (g)sl = 1 ( S) , 6F (S) , jqq = 1/2/3 ,(b)···where we have denoted the total angular momentum ofthe light diquark asjqq.
Coupling of angular momentaFigure 9.4.6 shows how the orbital angular momentumandthediquarkspincoupletothetotaldiquarkangularmomentum jl. This in turn couples to the heavy-quarkspin sQ giving rise to spin doublets (or just spin-1/2states forjl = 0). Note theΛ and Ξ spin doublet withsl = 0 and ¯3F. In this case the wave function is anti-symmetric in spin and flavor, this is a “good” diquark.
Fig.9.4.6 Heavybaryonsin P-wave.Thelightdiquarkcouplesto the spin of the heavy quark. The light diquark ofΛ and Ξheavy baryons are in the antisymmetric flavor¯3F and in thesymmetric6F inthecaseof Σ,Ξ′ andΩ(Adaptedfrom[ 2837]).
Table 9.4.3The λ- andρ-mode assignments of theP and D-wave excitations of singly-heavy baryons.lρ,lλ are orbital an-gular momenta of the two oscillators,Lthe total orbital angularmomentum, sq is the spin,jq the total angular momentum ofthe diquark, andJ the total spin.
lρ lλ L s q jq Λ,Ξ Σ,Ξ ′,Ω J P0 1 1 0 1 λ ρ 1/2−,3/2−0 1 1 1 0 ρ λ 1/2−1 0 1 1 1 ρ λ 1/2−,3/2−1 0 1 1 2 ρ λ 3/2−,5/2−0 2 2 0 2 λ - 3/2+,5/2+2 0 2 0 2 ρ - 3/2+,5/2+0 2 2 1 1 - λ 1/2+,3/2+0 2 2 1 2 - λ 3/2+,5/2+0 2 2 1 3 - λ 5/2+,7/2+2 2 2 1 1 - ρ 1/2+,3/2+2 0 2 1 2 - ρ 3/2+,5/2+2 0 2 1 3 - ρ 5/2+,7/2+Only a few heavy baryons are known withL = 2 :Λc and Λb with spin-parity3/2+ and 5/2+. The otherexpected states seem to show up only in the higher-mass, less-explored region. The two observed doubletscan be assigned to a configuration in which lρ = 2 ,Lλ = 0, and the diquark is in¯3F and sl = 0.
The diquark is a “good” diquark. Note that thestates Λc(2860), Λc(2880) with spin-parity 3/2+ and5/2+ (L = 2 ) are belowΛc(2940) with 3/2−. The lat-ter state has a “bad” diquark and is excited toL= 1 intheρoscillator. In this competition, the “good” diquarkand λ excitation with L = 2 wins over “bad” diquarkand ρ oscillator even though the orbital angular mo-mentum ofΛc(2940) is L= 1!Table 9.4.3 gives a survey of the coupling schemeof Qqq baryons. The spin and orbital angular momen-tum of the two light quarks couple to jq, and when344 9 BARYONScombined with the heavy-quark spinsQ, the finalJPresults. There are also states with mixed excitationslike lρ = 1 , lλ = 1 . These are unlikely to be produced(see Section 9.2) and are not included here.Λ and Ξwith sq = 0 and lρ = 0 have a “good” light diquark.
For theΛc we denote the light diquark by[u,d]. Notethat also one light and the heavy quark can be anti-symmetric in their spin and flavor wave function. Wewrite Σb = [ub]s.
Heavy quark limitWhen mQ →∞, the heavy quark spinsQ is conserved.
Due to the conservation of the total angular momen-tum J, also the angular momentum carried by the lightquarks is conserved. Hence all interactions which de-pend on the spin of the heavy quark disappear. Thus,the mass difference within a spin doublet with, e.g.,JP = 3/2+ and1/2+, will disappear in the heavy-quarklimit. Indeed, the mass differencesMΣ(1520)3/2+ −MΣ(1190) = 230 MeVMΣc(2520)3/2+ −MΣc(2455) = 65 MeVMΣb(5830)3/2− −MΣb(5820) = 20 MeVdecrease asmQ becomes large.
9.4.6 A guide to the literatureThe first prediction of the full spectrum of baryons in-cluding charmed and bottom baryons was presented byCapstick and Isgur [736], three years before the firstbaryon with bottomness was discovered. The publica-tion remained a guideline for experimenters for now36 years! Capstick and Isgur used a relativized quarkmodelwithaconfiningpotentialandeffectiveone-gluonexchange. Based on the quark model, further studiesof the mass spectra of heavy baryons were performed.
They are numerous, and only a selction of papers canbe mentioned here.
Ebert,FaustovandGalkincalculatedthemassspec-tra for orbital and radial excitations and constructedRegge trajectories [2838]. Yu, Li, Wang, Lu, and Ya[2839] calculated the mass spectra and decays of heavybaryons excited in theλ-mode. Li, Yu, Wang, Lu, andGu [2840] restricted the calculation - again based on therelativized quark model - to theΞc and Ξb families. Intheir model, all excitations are in theλ-mode.
Migura, Merten, Metsch, and Petry [2841] calcu-lated excitations of charmed baryons within a relativis-ticallycovariantquarkmodelbasedontheBethe-Salpeter-equation in instantaneous approximation. Interactionsare given by a linearly rising three-body confinementpotential and a flavor dependent two-body force de-rived from QCD instanton effects. Valcarce, Garcilazoand Vijande [2842] performed a comparative Faddeevstudy of heavy baryons with nonrelativistic and rela-tivistic kinematics and different interacting potentialsthat differ in the description of the hyperfine splitting.
The authors conclude that the mass difference betweenmembers of the same SUF(3) configuration, either¯3For 6F, is determined by the interaction in the light-heavy quark subsystem, and the mass difference be-tween members of different representations is mainlydetermined by the dynamics of the light diquark.
Chen, Wei and Zhang [2843] derive a mass formulain a relativistic flux tube model to calculate mass spec-tra for Λ and Ξ heavy baryons and assign quantumnumbers to states whose quantum numbers were notknown. Faustov and Galkin [2844] assigned flavor- andsymmetry dependent masses and form factors to di-quarksandcalculatedthemassesofheavybaryonswithina relativistic quark-diquark picture. Quantum numbersare suggested for theΩc excitations [2845, 2846] andother states with unknown spin-parities. A further di-quark model, again with adjusted diquark masses, ispresented by Kim, Liu, Oka, and Suzuki [2847] ex-ploiting a chiral effective theory of scalar and vectordiquarks according to the linear sigma model.
QCD sum rules have been exploited to study P-wave heavy baryons and their decays within the heavyquark effective theory (see [2848] and refs. therein). Thelow-lying spectrum of charmed baryons has also beencalculated in lattice QCD with a pion mass of 156MeV[2849]. The results - comparing favorably with the data- are compared to earlier lattice studies that are notdiscussed here.
All calculations reproduce the observed spectrumwith good success, with a large number of parameters.
For the reader, it is often not easily seen what arethe main driving forces that generate the mass spec-trum. Clearly, a confinement potential is mandatory,spin dependent forces are necessary. In the followingphenomenological part we try to identify the leadingeffects driving the resonance spectrum.
Table 9.4.4 Increase of baryon masses with the number ofstrange quarks.
n→ s 2n→ 2s 3n→ 3s∆−(1232)3/2+ Σ−(1385)3/2+ Ξ−(1530)3/2+ Ω−3/2++155 MeV +148 MeV + 137 MeVΣ0c(2520)3/2+ Ξ0c(2645)3/2+ Ω0c(2770)3/2++128 MeV + 120 MeVΣ0c(2455)1/2+ Ξ′0c 1/2+ Ω0c 1/2++121 MeV +116 MeVΣ−b (5816)1/2+ Ξ′0b 1/2+ Ω−b 1/2++120 MeV +111 MeV9.4 Heavy-flavor baryons 3459.4.7 Phenomenology of heavy baryonsWe start with a simple observation: masses of baryonsincrease when auor dquark is replaced by ansquark(see Table 9.4.4). For light baryons, this is known asU-spin rule. The constituents-quark mass decreases inheavybaryons.Notethatthedifferenceofcurrentquarkmasses isms−mn ≈124 MeV (see Table3.1.1 on page46).
In Table 9.4.5 we show the mass difference of thelowest-massJP = 3/2− stateswith( u,d,s,c )or( u,d,s,b )quarks and theJP = 1/2+ ground states: The mass dif-ferences are surprisingly small. TheN(1520) −N massdifference is 580 MeV, much larger than the mass differ-ences seen here. In the table, [ud] represents wave func-tions with au,d quark pair that is anti-symmetric inspin and flavor. These diquarks are often calledgood di-quarks.Thepresenceofgooddiquarksleadstoastrongerbinding. In the 4-plet, all three quark pairs have sucha component w.r.t. their exchange. We denote this by[ud,us,ds]. Thus there are three good diquarks in thewave function. This fact leads to the low masses of the4-plet members. The similarity of the mass splittingssupports similar interpretations of the four resonancesfrom Λ(1520) to Ξ0b 3/2−.
Inmostpublications,bothresonances, Λc(2595)1/2−and Λc(2625)3/2−, are discussed as 3-quark baryons.
However, Nieves and Pavao [2850] have studied thesetwo resonances in an effective field theory that incor-porates the interplay betweenΣ(∗)c π−ND(∗) baryon-mesondynamicsandbare P-wavecudquark-modelstateand suggest that these two resonances are not heavyquark symmetry spin partners. Instead, they seeΛc(2625)3/2−as a dressed three-quark state whileΛc(2595)1/2− is re-portedtohaveapredominantmolecularstructure.Nev-ertheless,thetwostates Λc(2625)3/2− andΛc(2595)1/2−obviously form a spin doublet.
The mass shift in H atoms between the two groundstates with electron and proton spins parallel or an-tiparallel is called hyperfine splitting. We borrow thisexpression to discuss the difference between the groundTable 9.4.5Mass splitting between baryon ground states be-longing to the symmetric 20plet (withJP = 3 /2+) and to themixed-symmetry 20plet (withJP = 1 /2+).
Ξ0b 3/2− [us,ub,sb] Ξ0b 1/2+ [us] δM = 310 MeVΛ0b 3/2− [ud,ub,db] Λ0b 1/2+ [ud] δM = 300 MeVΞ+c 3/2− [us,uc,sc] Ξ+c 1/2+ [us] δM = 350 MeVΛ+c 3/2− [ud,uc,dc] Λ+c 1/2+ [ud] δM = 400 MeVΛ(1520) [ud,us,ds] Λ1/2+ [ud] δM = 400 MeVstates with all three quark spins adding toJ = 3/2 (andbelonging to the symmetric 20-plet) and with thosehaving J = 1 /2 (that belong to the mixed-symmetrx20-plet). We thus compare masses of the fully symmet-ric 20s-plet with those from the¯3-plet or 6-plet withinthe 20m-plet (see Table9.4.6). The two configurationsdiffer by the orientation of the heavy-quark spin rela-tive to the spin of the light diquark. According to theheavy-quark-spin symmetry, this mass difference has tovanish with mQ →∞. In the Table we assume con-stituent quark masses of 0.15GeV (u,d), 0.3GeV (s),1.25GeV (c) and 4.1GeV (b).
The JP = 3/2+ states have a fully symmetric flavorwave function, theJP = 1 /2+ states have an antisym-metric quark pair (a good diquark) that is indicated inthe list. Their effect scales with1/mq. The mass shiftdue to the presence of good diquarks is expected forinstanton-induced interactions.
Heavy baryons at higher mass:Next we discuss the higher-mass negative-parity states.
In light-baryon spectroscopy, there are seven negative-parity Λ states expected in the first excitation level:two singlet states with JP = 1 /2−,3/2−, two octetstates with intrinsic total quark spins= 1/2 and JP =1/2−,3/2−, and aJP = 1 /2−,3/2−,5/2− triplet withs = 3 /2. In light baryons, bothλ and ρ oscillator arecoherently excited. In heavy-quark baryons, the two os-cillators decouple, and theλand ρmodes are well sep-arated. The low-lying spin-doublet ofP-waveΛQ statesis dominated by aλ-mode excitation, the other five ex-pected states are excited in theρ mode.
Unfortunately, only one negative-parity state at ahigher mass has been reported, theΛc(2940)3/2−. Itsmass is 653 MeV above theΛ+c . We interpret this stateaslρ excitationwithadiquarkspin s= 1.The Λ(1690)3/2−Table 9.4.6 Mass splitting between baryons with fully sym-metric wave functions and baryons with antisymmetric quarkpairs. The [us] indicates an antismmetric quark pair.
δM m q δM · mqΣb 3/2+ Λb [ud]b 0.211 MeV ∼ 0.3 GeV 0.063Σc 3/2+ Λc [ud]c 0.232 MeV ∼ 0.3 GeV 0.070Σ 3/2+ Λ [ud]s 0.268 MeV ∼ 0.3 GeV 0.080∆ 3/2+ N [ud]u 0.292 MeV ∼ 0.3 GeV 0.088Ξb 3/2+ Ξb [us]b 0.163 MeV ∼ 0.45 GeV 0.073Ξc 3/2+ Ξc [us]c 0.177 MeV ∼ 0.45 GeV 0.080Ξ 3/2+ Ξ [us]s 0.217 MeV ∼ 0.45 GeV 0.098Σ 3/2+ Σ [us]u 0.191 MeV ∼ 0.45 GeV 0.086Ξc 3/2+ Ξ′c [uc]s 0.067 MeV ∼ 1.4 GeV 0.093Σc 3/2+ Σc [uc]u 0.065 MeV ∼ 1.4 GeV 0.090Ξb 3/2+ Ξ′b [ub]s 0.020 MeV ∼ 4.25 GeV 0.085Σb 3/2+ Σb [ub]u 0.021 MeV ∼ 4.25 GeV 0.089346 9 BARYONSFig. 9.4.7 (Color online) TheJ/ψp mass distribution fittedwith three BW amplitudes and a sixth-order polynomial back-ground. The thresholds for theΣ+c ¯D0. (Adapted from [2829].)is only 570MeV above theΛ, it is excited in both theλ and theρ mode.
The mass of Λc(2940)3/2− (with intrinsic orbitalangular momentumL = 1 ) is above the masses of thepositive-parity statesΛc(2860)3/2+ and Λc(2880)5/2+(having L= 2). Yet, the mass ofΛ(1690)3/2− falls wellbelow the masses ofΛ(1890)3/2+ and Λ(1820)5/2+ forreasons discussed above.
9.4.8 PentaquarksIn 2015, the LHCb collaboration reported the obser-vation of two exotic structures in theJ/ψp system, abroad resonant structure with a Breit-Wigner width ofabout 200 MeV called Pc(4380)+ and a narrow statecalled Pc(4450)+ [2828]. The exotic structures were ob-servedinthereaction Λ0b →J/ψK−p.Anexcitedthree-quark nucleon cannot decay intoJ/ψp, this would vio-late the OZI rule. Hence the minimal quark content is(c¯cuud). The findings met with great interest; the pub-lication is quoted nearly 1500 times (2022, November).
Indeed narrow baryonic resonances with hidden charmhad been predicted several years before as dynamicallygenerated states [2851–2853].
A multitude of different interpretations of the ob-served structures is offered in the literature, but noneis accepted anonymously. There are numerous reviewson tetra- and pentaquarks and their possible interpre-tations [1388, 2638, 2854–2857].
With increased statistics,Pc(4312)+ was confirmedand the higher-massPc(4450)+ was shown to be splitinto two narrow overlapping structures,Pc(4440)+ andPc(4457)+ [2829]. The existence of the broad resonancewas not confirmed. The data and a fit are shown inTable 9.4.7J/ψp and J/ψΛ pentaquarks found by the LHCbcollaboration.
Pc(4312)+: M = (4311.9 ±0.7 +6.8−0.6) MeV[2829] Γ = (9.8 ±2.7 +3.7−4.5) MeVPc(4380)+: M = (4380 ±30) MeV[2828] Γ = (205 ±90) MeVPc(4440)+: M = (4440.3 ±1.3 +4.1−4.7) MeV[2829] Γ = (20.6 ±4.9 +8.7−10.1) MeVPc(4457)+: M = (4457.3 ±0.6 +4.1−1.7) MeV[2829] Γ = (6.4 ±2.0 +5.7−1.9) MeVPc(4337)+: M = (4337 +7−4+2−2) MeV[2859] Γ = (29 +26−12+14−14) MeVP0cs(4459): M = (4458.8 ±2.9 +4.7−1.1) MeV[2861] Γ = (17.3 ±6.5 +8.0−5.7) MeVP0cs(4338): M = (4338.2 ±0.7 ±0.4) MeV[2862] Γ = (7.0 ±1.2 ±1.3) MeVFig. 9.4.7 which also displays some relevant thresholds.
In addition, a further smaller structure can be seenat 4380MeV, close to the Σ+∗c ¯D0 threshold. A nar-row structure here is expected in molecular models (seee. g. [ 2858]), but due to limited statistics there wasno attempt to describe it in the recent LHCb analysis[2829]. The resonant parameters – including the broadstructure at 4380MeV – are reproduced in Table9.4.7.
Quantum numbersJP = 3 /2− and 5/2+ were pre-ferred forPc(4380)+ and Pc(4450)+. In the later pub-lication [2829], no quantum numbers are determined.
In the reaction B0s → J/ψ ¯pp a pentaquark-likestructure, namedPc(4337)+, was observed in theJ/ψ ¯pand J/ψp mass distributions [2859]. The significance,as determined from a 3-body amplitude analysis, is be-tween 3.1 and 3.7σ. Its Breit-Wigner parameters areincompatible with the structures observed inΛb decays.
The lighter state at4312 MeV was not found in this re-action, highlighting the importance of the productionmechanism for the formation of these resonances. How-ever, it has been pointed out in [2860] that in a regionwith many close-by thresholds, the Breit-Wigner pa-rameters measured in a particular channel may differsignificantly from the pole location.
Strangecounterpartstothesepentaquarkstates,e.g.
resonances in the J/ψΛ system, are denoted by Pcsand have (c¯cuds) as minimal quark content. A peakhave been reported by LHCb in the reactionΞ−b →J/ψΛK− [2861]. Close to theΞ0c D∗0 threshold a fur-ther peak was found, with a mass and width given inTable 9.4.7, too.
The J/ψΛ system was also investigated in 2019 byCMS [2863], exploiting the small phase space availablein the B-meson decay B− → J/ψΛ ¯p. The analysisshowed that the observed spectrum was incompatible